Shani Haruna:	This interview annon number 005 with 303.
Translator:	To do the translation from Kusaal to English is me Atirago Kate Atipoka.
Shani Haruna:	So the first thing we would like to know.... We would like to know her full name, date of birth and then whether he's is female or male.
Translator:	My name is 303. I'm 34 years of age and I'm a female.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And do you hold a community position?
Translator:	Yes, I hold a position. I'm the women organizer for the new patriotic party for this community.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Sowe would also like to find out or understand what her understanding of the brave project is.
Translator:	I've learned a lot from this project. For instance, how to do composting or organic manure. Besides that, I've also learned how to do bonding so that there will always be moisture on my farm.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Did they talk to you about water and what did they talk about water?
Translator:	With the brave project I have learned a lot. For instance, I have acquired a new knowledge on how to do bonding so that in case it even rain heavily, it will not spoil my farm. Besides that, I've also learned how to harvest this rain water for usage, especially during dry season.
Shani Haruna:	Did they talk about boreholes or wells? And what did they talk to you about boreholes or wells that are here?
Translator:	Though we were taught how to do dug-outs or boreholes, especially dug-outs on our gardens, but it's unfortunate because we don't have the efforts or we can't afford it's always difficult. Had it not because of that we were taught that when we get like cements and plaster inside the water will be able to be there for a long time for us to be using it on our farms, like especially our watering our gardens.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. What did they tell you about groundwater in the course of the project?
Translator:	We were taught that anytime we dig we should try and build around it so that the water will not be washed away or the water can stay there for some time. At least when we build around it, the water will always be there for maybe the time we may prefer to use.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Then what do use that water for?
Translator:	We use it for our irrigation work especially watering our groundnuts, cabbage and different kinds of vegetables on our gardens.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. At what time of the year do you use those water?
Translator:	The water we harvested or the underground water are finished for now because we started using it in October and for now those waters are no more there but fortunately we have a dam by where our gardens are. So we have connected some pipes in the dam that we are using it for irrigation. So that is what we are using for now. But the underground water has finished.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So we are now I'm going to talk about access to weather information and then how they use such information.
Shani Haruna:	Well would like to know, how did you find out information about the weather last season? How did she find out information about the weather last season?
Translator:	I heard the information from this.... I had an information from radio station and this particular brave project that this particular year or the last season we'll get more rains than the other seasons. But unfortunately to me, I didn't experience that much. Besides that too we were told that there will be thunder, but we didn't experience it like how they were telling us that it would be.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And which radio station did you hear the information from?
Translator:	I have heard the information from about three radio stations, GBC, sunshine and Quality FM.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Soapart from the radio stations, where else do you get information about the weather?
Translator:	Apart from the radio stations I have not heard it anywhere because I cannot read, even if a text message is given to me on the phone, I wouldn't know what it is about.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So, are there groups here where maybe you a member then you can have access to the weather information?
Translator:	Apart from hearing it on the radio, I also get the information from this brave project and sometimes when we meet as group, either I share the information or I can also acquire an information from maybe someone concerning the weather.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So which other groups are you a member of where you share the information or get the information?
Translator:	We also have our VSLA group that sometimes we share the weather information there.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So that was for last season. So for this season, how did he find out information about the weather? Where did you get information about the weather
Translator:	We were told that we'll have medium, like the rain it will not be high. It will be medium. And we were told when to a plant, but unfortunately the rain stopped in the middle and even exceeded the time that they said the rain will stop.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. When did the rain stop?
Translator:	It stopped in the 11th month, that's November.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Is it normal for the rains to stop in November?
Translator:	It's not normal though, but every time depends on God. What happened this season, how It rained it spoilt most of our produce.
Shani Haruna:	So you mentioned you had some information about the weather. What changes did you make as a result of you getting that information in your farming activities or livestock rearing?
Translator:	I have been...... The information I always hear about the weather, the changes is that I always start farming or planting so my crops normally do well because I will listen and use the new varieties that I'm supposed to do. Besides that, when I'm even in the farm and I see to eat that is threatening to rain, I'll make sure I'll call home and whoever is there will make sure that he'll will send or go for the animals in case they are outside.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So we would you to give us some examples of the crops that you changed as a result of you hearing information about the weather; the crops that maybe you decided to sow or not to sow because you heard information about the weather.
Translator:	Earlier I used to farm only millet. But due to the information I've been getting, this season I decided to divide my farm. I planted maize and sorghum and it also did very well due to the time I started planting. Because I heard information that we should plant this particular time and I actually followed and I have gained from it.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. What time did you start the sowing of the sorghum and then the maize?
Translator:	For the sorghum I planted in the sixth month. But for the maize it was in the seventh months. But due to the variety I used, it was able to do well. It yields very well for me.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. What variety did you use? How many days did it take to yield?
Translator:	I bought the variety from agric station. But because it has been long, I can't remember. But it took maximum of 70 days going that I started harvesting.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And that's for both of the maize and then the sorghum?
Translator:	That's for the maize.
Shani Haruna:	How about the sorghum?
Translator:	For that one I didn't calculate the number of days or months it took and I can't also remember the name.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So before you bought those varieties, which varieties were you using and how long were they taking to mature?
Translator:	Before this information from brave I was not even planting maize. It was only millet that I was planting. So I don't have any number of days or variety that I was using. I wasn't planting.
Shani Haruna:	Okay, that's good. So the information that you have been hearing about the weather, in the future what would be the best way for you to receive that information?
Translator:	For the future I think it's just through maybe such a program like the brave project that I can be getting information or through the radio station, or if someone get the information on his or her phone, the person too can share it with me.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. If you say someone gets the information is it a man or a woman who will get such information on the phone and then share with you?
Translator:	The person can either be a male or female. We have children who are educated. So whoever share the information to us is the important thing.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So apart from the radio or the phone, which other source would you like to receive the information from? Are there government institutions or office is where you would want to have such information from?
Translator:	I wish if any institution can share the information with us any time, but I cannot decide because God does his work. If the spirit of God should touch someone whoever comes with the information, I will receive it.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Now, let's talk about the radio that she mentioned. Does she think that men listen to radio more than women? Or women listen to radio more than men?
Translator:	Women listen to radio station more than men because most of the men don't sit at home or they don't sit at one particular place. Though, some do use their phones to listen to radio. But depending on the distance, if it is far away, they may not get the signal through their phones.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Do you think that men have more phones than women?
Translator:	She doesn't think men have phones than women. It may be equal.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So why do you think so?
Translator:	Why I'm saying so is this, one man or a man can have two or more wives and all or both the women will be having phones. Besides that, I can also call my child at wherever she or he is, and he can even add me a phone and I will decide to be using two or to even give one to my child. So women have phones more than men.
Shani Haruna:	That's wonderful. Okay. So do agric extension officers it visit you here?
Translator:	We used to have extension officers who normally visit us, but unfortunately, just this season or last season, we didn't get some. Though sometimes when we call on them, they do listen to us by coming.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So why are they no more coming? Why don't they visit you again?
Translator:	I can't tell. I don't know whether maybe we have done something wrong or maybe we have against a law that they don't want to visit us again. But like those days, anytime we are in our dry season farming or our gardens, they do visit to check on our vegetable. But for now I can't tell why they are not visiting us anymore.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So how long has this been since they last visited?
Translator:	From last two years going they were coming, but last year we didn't see them. For this season have just started so I cannot tell if they will be coming or not.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So when they visit do they normally provide information about water management and then weather?
Translator:	Yes, they do tell us how to manage our water or how to take care of our crops well. For instance, when they talk about the weather, they always come with the varieties that will help us. So normally they even come with different kinds of varieties. For example, for Okro, for carrot and some kind of our vegetables that we farm. So we normally buy the varieties from them. Besides that, they always tell us how to water these vegetables in a proper way.
Shani Haruna:	Okay, that's wonderful. Apart from the brief project, how do they get access to the agric extension offices?
Translator:	That is what I said previously. Those days, they were coming but for the whole of last year we didn't see them apart from maybe they coming through this brave project.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	So now I'm going to talk about access to crop information and then it's use. So the first thing we would like to know is, how did she find out information about her crops last season?
Translator:	I had my information on this brave project. For instance, I had information on how to plough my farm, how to do bonding and different kinds of things that will help me have a good yield.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Apart from those ones what other information did they talk to you about?
Translator:	I've learned a lot on this project. I've learned how to harvest, when to harvest, produce management, storage and different kind of things. I've learned a lot.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. That was for last season. So how did... Where did she get information this season?
Translator:	It's the same this brave project that I had the information from.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And what did they discuss or inform you about? What information did you hear?
Translator:	The information I had this season is not different from last season. I've learned how to manage my farm produce, when to sell and what you sell for. Those days that we were not having any knowledge, we normally sell just to buy clothing for funerals or how we even cook at funeral houses. We used to waste a lot. But from the information from brave, I've learned a lot. I've learned a lot from it.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So in the future what would be the best way for her to receive such information again?
Translator:	I would have been happy if I'll be hearing this information from brave all of the time. But I always say and I will say everything depends on God. Wherever the information comes I will receive it in good faith.
Shani Haruna:	So apart from brave, which other way would she want to receive the information?
Translator:	I wish an information will be coming from agric or MoFA whereby the agric extension officers will be briefing us on this agric programs or crops and rearing.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Then what changes did you make as a result of you getting the information?.
Translator:	Day will break us If I mean to narrate what I have gain from this project. But what I just want to say is before this project, I was not even into farming like that. But immediately this project came, now I farm a lot and I can harvest much.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So are you able to make me give us some examples of the family activities that you did and what you got from those activities?
Translator:	Yeah, there is changes because those days, the farm that I use to plant millet on it, I use not to get up to three basins or more than two basins. But for the information I've gotten, what I did last year was that I planted the millet along side with the maize. And fortunately the maize had about three bags, and the millet I had three basins even including soya beans. But I don't know whether it's the fertiliser or the compost that I have been applying on the farm that made me to harvest like that.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So we are now going to talk about the well monitoring that they did. Did she receive training on well monitoring?
Translator:	I can't remember of having any training on well monitoring.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So we're now going to talk about gender and then access to information. That's how men and women here have access to information differently. So in your opinion, do you think men and women have access to different information?
Translator:	To me it depends. If it is information that women want to hide from men, it maybe the woman who will here only that information. The other side too if it is something that men only want to discuss it within themselves, that information may be denied women. Had it not because of maybe... If not because of this thing I think every information we'll hear it equal.
Shani Haruna:	So what kind of information will women hear and men not hear?
Speaker 2:	I think some of the information that we women hide from men, some may think it is bad information. Well, individual difference, for example, assuming, I'm a woman and I want to go and do family planning. My husband may not allow me if he should here or if I should inform him. So what I'll do is maybe talking or discussing about it to a colleague woman or hiding to go and do it.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Then what kind of information will men only hear and not allow women to hear,
Translator:	The information she thinks men will be hiding from women is when they get money. When they get money, they will not like to let women know. Even if they'll inform them it wouldn't be the exact amount. It may be quarter of the amount that they've gotten.
Shani Haruna:	Do men get more information about water than (wo)men? Or women get more information about water than men?
Translator:	This one depends. Assuming the community is a community that women have more power, I think they're the very people who will hear water information first. If it's also the men who have the power maybe to lobby or be leaders in the community, they'll will be the very people who get such information first.
Shani Haruna:	So here specifically, what is the situation? Is it men who get more information about water or women get more information about water?
Translator:	For this our community, it is the men who get water information first.
Shani Haruna:	So why do they get it first?
Translator:	It is because the men are more civilized and they know the importance of water. So they always fight or make sure wherever they will go to get support of this thing, water for instance, they will make sure they will fight for whoever is responsible for providing water will get them some.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So here, who is responsible for finding water for the household? Is it the man or the woman?
Translator:	It is women who fetch water for the household. But when it happens that a borehole or well is spoilt If a man, or if the men don't add their hands, it won't work for them or they will not solve the issue.
Shani Haruna:	Why wouldn't they solve the issue?
Translator:	We women we don't fear each other. Assuming maybe a borehole spoils and I should inform a colleague, the person may not take it serious because both of us are women, but if a man is involved, they will have that fear. And if it is about contribution or whatever, they will make sure they will work things out.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So she mentioned that men have access to water information more than women. Does that affect the relationship there between men and women?
Translator:	Sometimes it brings misunderstanding between them and the men in the sense that sometimes they come out and oppose an amount for them to contribute. So in that case, it always leads to misunderstanding on the amount to be paid. For instance, if it is not an NGO, and it is maybe government or an association, sometime they are asked to contribute so that they may use that money or sometimes they use that money to buy something like an animal as a gift and give it to those who have dug the borehole for them. Sometimes too they use the money to buy cement and plaster the place.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So who decides how much they pay if they are to make a contribution?
Translator:	I think every community has a leader and it depends on their kind of maybe opportunity they are getting. If it is about water, they have someone who normally lead them. If it is about a different thing that is coming into the community, they also have a leader for that particular opportunity that they may get. So it's always the leader who decides how much they should pay.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So we are now coming to talk about water use, management and then disagreements. What do you use water for?
Translator:	I use water for domestic use, for instance, for drinking, bathing, washing and for my animals to also drink.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So what has allowed her to plan her water use better?
Translator:	For the information from brave I've learned how to manage my water, how to take good care of it. For example, those days, I used not to cover my water anytime I fetch to my container. But for the information I've been hearing I now cover it neatly because I know if I don't treat it well, I may acquire sickness through that.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And then how has the brave project helped you to manage your water better?
Translator:	Now I have different containers that I use to fetch water through the information I've gotten from brave. For instance, what I'm using to drink is different from what I use to cook and what I use to wash. I normally fetch what I used to wash do my washing to the local ports. But for the rubber containers, those one can easily get broken by the sun so because of that, that one is always placed at where there is shade and I maybe first time there that I used to cook in a different place to what I used to drink and I made sure that those ones are well covered.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So what about the sources that you go to fetch the water, like the boreholes or the wells, how has the project helped you to manage those sources, the boreholes and the wells, better?
Translator:	The project have made us to be cleaning wherever we fetch our water very well. For instance, the borehole for instance, we always have days that we do the cleaning. We make sure rubbers, rags or whatever is there that makes it place unpleasant we pick them. Even if we get to know that someone has washed at that place and left a dress or whatever and they are able to detect they make sure they send it to the person and advise the person that next time he should always make sure that he packs all his or her things. So they clean the place very well from the information they had from brave.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And that's okay. And then for the boreholes and then the Wells and even the dam do they have a committee that is responsible for managing them?
Translator:	We have committees for all these projects. Is it the dams, the wells, the boreholes. So for instance, if something is not even going on well and maybe a committee member is not aware, you the one who is a member of the community, you can brief them what is happening and they will sit with them and solve it. In case maybe assuming it is a problem.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So for for a borehole, how many people are in the committee?
Translator:	For the borehole we have about six people or members who are the committee.
Shani Haruna:	What are their roles? What do they do?
Translator:	I think some.... What she is saying, some take care of maintenance. Even If not they themselves, when they detect a fault their in-charge will report to, maybe to whoever is responsible for them to look, a maintenance team. We have organizers in it and we have the sanitation, that's the sama sama people who make sure the places is always neat.
Shani Haruna:	So apart from those ones which other roles do they have?
Translator:	The committee is not only taking care of the boreholes but they also have some aspects or some roles that they play. For instance, if they see someone house being filthy or very dirty, they can call the person and talk to the person to do cleaning. If the person refused, they will insist or they will call the person and sit the person now and advice him or her to make sure that the place is always neat.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So how many people are in the dam committee?
Speaker 2:	I can't really tell, but I think they will be more than twelve in number and sometime they like changing them. Assuming, if someone is not playing his role well, or maybe they call for meeting twice or number of times and the person doesn't attend, they will try to replace someone. So for the number, I think it will be up to 12 or more.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So do you think water usage results in disagreements here?
Translator:	For the water usage it brings a lot of eh, misunderstanding between them, especially the dams where most of them have, their gardens behind. Anytime they open the dam some of them don't have the machines and it is for them to use their hands to be fetching watering. But unfortunately, someone with a machine may be in front of you and the person, some people are having the water pumping machines or their pipes which are connected to their farm. So anytime they open the dams, they always block the water and have to water all their garden and you will be behind them waiting for the water to even come small and you use your hand to fetch or your guide or what ever to water and you will not be getting the opportunity. So if you should move in front to realize that it is the one who have the pumping machine who have blocked it, what will come from your mouth, it wouldn't be good because you have also wasted time and the person is wasting your time.
Shani Haruna:	So how do you normally deal with such situations?
Translator:	What they normally do is this, after that when they see each other they greet, if they greet and you don't respond, that is it. If you think the fault is not coming from you, you wouldn't have a problem. But how I normally do to know whether the fault is coming from me or not is that when it happens like that, I always call a witness to come and witness or see. If the person comes and I realize that what the person is saying is also against the person, then I will know definitely I am right. So if I greet the person, he doesn't respond, that is it. If she responds, then that means the problem is solved.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So the people who are in charge of managing the dam, are they able to solve such issues?
Translator:	It depends. If it is a big issue, something we can't solve it there, we'll always make sure the information gets to them. When it gets to them they call us to sit us down. But if it is mere one, we ourselves will just solve it in the farm and that will be all.
Shani Haruna:	So how about the boreholes and the wells are there disagreements around those ones too?.
Translator:	They also have misunderstanding there, but it's not much as compared to the dams. But normally this happen between the children. But for the grownups it's just... It's not much. It's just sometime small. For instance, if they have understanding, but when it happens that maybe you are having two jerrycans that you want to fetch both and you cannot carry both to the house and it is that carrying one and leaving one and going to come back and she will be standing. That one, she won't agree. You have to fetch one, go and come back and fetch. Because if you are a fetching two make sure you carry the two all and go
Shani Haruna:	So how has the brave project helped in resolving some of the disagreements?
Speaker 2:	What the project have helped us resolving, dealing with such issues is that I have heard the information. So even if a colleague or my friend, don't have any knowledge or information from the brave and we have gone to the borehole to fetch and maybe the person wants to cause that disagreements, I will just calm myself down and maybe comport myself and just ignore for the person to do whatever she or he wants. And after that I'll also fetch my water.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Then since the project started has the way you've been using water... The way you make decisions on how to or what to use the water for, are there changes in the decisions that you make regarding how you use water?
Translator:	Yeah, there are changes. For instance, when I had information from brave or what I've learned through this project is that, I now know how to manage. For instance, if there is a quantity of water that I would have misused one day, I will know that the water will be value to me the next day. So I will be able to manage with it, that it will remain and I will use it the next day for something else. But I won't waste it just one particular day.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So how has the brave helped you to increase your income and then assets?
Translator:	I've learned a lot in a way that it gives me income. For instance, those days, I used not to farm much, but now I cultivate more and besides that I don't sell like how I used to sell. For instance, those days, if I hear that there's a funeral somewhere, I always sell to go and buy a cloth, a uniform, funeral uniform. But this time I don't do those things. I'll make sure I'll keep the produce for the time that I think there will be markets, high markets that I will then sell. Even if there is no market I'll wait till maybe the next season again, I will not waste it.
Shani Haruna:	So what needs to happen to improve water access here?
Translator:	If the dams can be rehabilitated then it will help us. For instance, our community dam here when you get there though there is water but inside it is not deep. You can just maybe go through and even cross. It's not deep. So if they are able to rehabilitate then there will be having enough water all the time. Besides that, if they can also help them with number of boreholes so that it will be easy for them to access water and it wouldn't be like going to queue all the time to get water for your domestic use.
Shani Haruna:	Now. The very last question. How would you want the local district assembly to help in water management?
Translator:	Yeah. The assembly supporting us with money or giving us money is something that will finish within a shortest possible time. For instance, if there is a funeral somewhere and maybe they are going to sympathize with them, sometime they give money. She would prefer that money or such money should be given to them or use the money to rehabilitate the dam or maybe expand the number of boreholes within the communities for them.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So we would like to thank you so much for your time and then the information that you have shared with us.
Translator:	She also appreciates and she's tanking both of us for the time we have gotten for her to also share her knowledge. She appreciates.
Speaker 3:	Okay.


