Shani Haruna:	This interview is with 306, annon number 007
Translator:	To do the translation on behalf of 306 is I Atirago Kate Atipoka
Shani Haruna:	Sothe first thing we will like to know is her full name and date of Birth and whether she's male or female.
Translator:	My name is 306. I'm 35 years of age and I'm a female.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And does she hold any position here?
Translator:	No, I don't hold any position.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So we would like to know what her understanding of the brave project is.
Translator:	What I know about brave project is that it tells us how to do farming and how to live in our households.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. What did they tell them about water under the project?
Translator:	What I learned from this project or what the projects have taught me is, anytime I'm to fetch water, I make sure that my containers are neatly washed and after fetching water into them, I'll make sure it will be well covered.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And what did she hear about the groundwater?
Translator:	I've learned that anytime they want to give us water, maybe dig a borehole or a well, they will test that place, if it is a soil or the water to know if it doesn't have any problems that will affect them when they are to drink. So when they detect this thing they will know whether the place that they want to dig will be advisable to them and they will go ahead.
Shani Haruna:	Okay, that's okay. So we're now coming to talk about access to weather information and then how they use the weather information. So how did she find out information about the weather last season?
Translator:	What I heard about the weather information during last season was that we were told that there will be rains for very long time and when it is threatening to rain and we are in the farms we should make sure we'll leave whatever we are doing and rush home because it will come with wind.
Shani Haruna:	Where did that information come from? Where did she get that information?
Translator:	This information was heard from this brief project.
Shani Haruna:	By what means? From which source?
Translator:	They came with a Gmet expert who told or educated us on how the rains pattern would be.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So apart from the project, which other source did she get weather information from?
Translator:	I have also heard the information or I used to hear from radio stations whereby agric extension officers do discuss it on radios and be telling us the kind of varieties to be using.
Shani Haruna:	Which radio station did she listen to it?
Translator:	Quality FM in Garu district.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Then apart from the radio stations, are there other associations or groups where she is a member and is able to access information about the weather.
Translator:	No. Apart from this two, which is the radio station and through the brave project, I've never heard any informing about the weather anywhere.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. The radio that she mentioned that she listens to.... The radio set, who owns that radio that? Is it herself or her husband?
Translator:	The radio set is owned by my husband.
Shani Haruna:	Andwho uses it most?
Translator:	It was my husband who uses it most.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So now the next thing we will like to find out is, how did she find out information about the weather this season?
Translator:	We were told that this year or just the last season, there will be enough rains so we should try and do bonding so that whenever it's raining heavily it will not wash away our crops.
Shani Haruna:	And where did she hear that information from?
Translator:	The information is always heard from this brave project and the radio station who normally play what has been discussed here.
Shani Haruna:	Apart from the brave project and then the radio stations does she get information from government institutions or agencies or agric officers about the weather?
Translator:	No, it's just from these two places that I heard the weather information from.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. She mentioned she has had information about the weather. What changes did she make in her farming activities because she got that information?
Translator:	Due to the information I had I adopted the new varieties that they were educating us to be planting so that even if the rain rains small my crops will not spoil or if it rains less it will not affect my crops.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Can she give us examples of the crops that she sowed as a result of getting the weather information?
Translator:	I planted maize, millet and soybeans.
Shani Haruna:	What did she intend to sow before she heard the weather information and then decided to sow the maize, soybeans and the millet?
Translator:	It's the same crops, which is millet, maize and soybeans that I had wanted to plant.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And did you make any changes in terms of when you sowed the crops that you mentioned?
Translator:	The changes I have made is, when I heard the information the quantity that I planted was more than the previous years. Besides that I used new varieties, those that they were educating us to buy.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. The new varieties that she's talking about, what did they say about it that made her to buy it?
Translator:	What I was told was that some of the varieties don't take long time before it matures. Besides that we were taught how to plant them so that it will yield well for us.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Then, she mentioned she got weather information. Now, in the future what would be the best way for her to receive information about the weather?
Translator:	I pray I will be having radio set all the times so that I'll always tune to radio stations to be monitoring. Definitely I will be hearing something on the weather which will help me. So this is the medium I want to use in future to be listening to the weather information.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. In your opinion... In her opinion, does she think that men listen to radio more than women?
Translator:	I think men listen to radio more than women in a sense that when it is in the evening most men don't have much to do. They're always by their radio set listening to what is happening. But for women, you have to do household chores by fetching water, cooking and doing a lot of things. So by the time you finish all these things, the man have already listened a lot and maybe acquire some information that you have not gotten the opportunity to.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And is there a better way that she thinks that she can get more information apart from the radio?
Translator:	For her opinion, she thinks these projects should always be there so that she will be getting opportunity from this brave project to be hearing about the weather.
Shani Haruna:	Assuming in the absence of that project, what would be the best way for her to get access to weather information?
Translator:	My opinion is just on this project. I wish this one would just be there all the time for me to be getting the weather information.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. That's fine. So in her opinion again, does she think that men have more phones than women?
Translator:	I think men have phones more than ladies or woman in a sense that we women have a lot of responsibilities. For example, we buy ingredients, we buy soap, we buy a lot of things for the house. So I wouldn't agree to use my money and go and buy phone whereby my child may not have a dress to wear or there may not be soap for me to wash children clothing.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So don't the men also help with those items that she mentioned?
Translator:	They help though, but it's just a little, it's not enough.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. then how often does she get access to agric extension officer?
Translator:	I've never seen an agric officer visiting me to check my livestock or my crops.
Shani Haruna:	But has she ever been in a group meeting where the agric extension officer gives them information?
Translator:	I think it's just this brave project that I've been hearing such an information from the agric extension officers.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So when the agric extension officer visits does he or she give them information about water management?
Translator:	I've been taught that like any time it rains I shouldn't just let the water go waste, I should try to collect, even if it is rain water on the ground I should try to collect the water and make good use of such a water.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And would she like to get information from agric extension officers?
Translator:	Yes, I will like to be getting information from them. For instance, they're those who always teach us to manage our farm produce well and they will also teach us how to take care of our grains or look at it well, whereby it will be quality for us and anytime we are going to use, it wouldn't have bad effects on us. We should make sure there will not be...., It will not be contaminated in terms of chemicals or weevils that may harm us.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So, we're now coming to discuss access to crops information and then use. She mentioned she farms maize, soybeans and millet. So how did she find out information about the crops that she grows last season?
Translator:	Okay. I think it was just about the varieties that they introduced. We were told that those varieties are very good compared to those days when we were not getting those varieties. If I should say those days they used to be famine or hunger, but due to the varieties that they introduced it have reduce those hunger on previous years.
Shani Haruna:	Nowwhere did she get that information?
Translator:	I heard the information from MoFA official who spoke about it on air or radio station.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Then, how did she find out information about the crops that she grows this season?
Translator:	I heard the information from GBC URA radio Bolgatanga.
Shani Haruna:	What did you hear about crops?
Translator:	I heard that those varieties mature earlier. Besides that, it also do well.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And in the future, what would be the best way for her to receive such information?
Translator:	I wish the coming years this project will still be there whereby we'll be doing group discussion, radio discussions, and I'll be getting the information from there.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So how about..... Assuming the project is no more there what would be the other best way for her to get the information?
Translator:	Even if this project will not be there coming years, I wish the leaders of this project would try when it is time for planting or if it is raining season, they will get time to come and meet us maybe for some time and still educate us on our farming practices.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Then, from all the information that she heard, what changes did she make to her farming activities?
Translator:	Those days when I was not getting the information anytime I farm I don't always have good yields.
Shani Haruna:	And now that you have the informationwhat do you do differently that is making you to get more yields?
Translator:	I was thought the number of seeds or grains to be put in a hole and I was also applying organic fertilizer and how I was also applying it was very good because that was how I was taught. So these things led to my good yield.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. What about your livestock? Did you make any changes in your livestock activities?
Translator:	I rear fowls and the changes I have made is that this time I have a cage that I put them inside and make sure their food, their water is inside. I also make sure the place is neat. Unlike those days, I wasn't having time. Sometime they would die or some will even get lost that I cannot find them.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	How did she find the well monitoring training that she received? Did she receive a training on well monitoring?
Translator:	I didn't receive any information on well training. Well training.
Shani Haruna:	So we are now coming to talk about gender and access to general information. Does she think that men and women have access to different information?
Translator:	Yes. I think men or women have get different information.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So what kind of information do women get, and what kind of information do men get differently?
Translator:	For the men the information they will hear and hide from women sometime is that, when your relative is dead, and they receive the information, sometimes they will hide from you for some time. They wouldn't just tell you instant. If it is also about development and they receive any information at all, they will like to sit together to decide on whatever they are planning to do before maybe they may open up.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So do you think men get more information about the water than women?
Translator:	I think men have access to water information than women.
Shani Haruna:	Why is that so?
Translator:	Men are always the breadwinners of the family. So whatever comes, they are those who always receive the information first.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And does that affect the relationship between men and women?
Translator:	It doesn't spoil or affect any relationship between them.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. both men and women are okay with the way it is, with men getting the information first before the women?
Translator:	I think all of us are not having any problem with men receiving or having access to information first.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Then we're now coming to talk about water usage, management and disagreements. So the first thing we would like to discuss under that is, what has allowed her to plan her water use better?
Translator:	It's through this brave project that I've gotten these new knowledge on how to manage my water. So for now, how I wash, how I cook, however I do my domestic work, I know how to manage well, and it is through this project that I've learned from.
Shani Haruna:	So what did you learn about water management in the project?
Translator:	I was taught the importance of water usage and how to manage, so I know the essence of water usage so that's why I've adapted these changes.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	So would she say that water usage results in disagreements? The use of the boreholes and then the dams do disagreements often result as a result of them using the boreholes or the dams?
Translator:	It doesn't bring any disagreement between people.
Shani Haruna:	Why is that so?
Translator:	It doesn't bring disagreement in the sense that for the dams, for instance, we have dug-outs in our gardens and whenever they opened the dams, everybody's dug-out always get full with water and the person will be using it there to water his or her vegetables or crops. So, because the water is always there for everyone we don't have any disagreements.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	How about the use of have the boreholes? Do they result in any disagreement?
Translator:	For now we don't have any disagreements at our boreholes anytime we are to fetch water. Because unlike the previous years, when we were not having enough, that always lead to disagreement for who is to fetch first, but for now World Vision for instance, have helped out with number of boreholes. So there is no always queue anytime we're going to fetch. So it doesn't bring disagreements.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Then how has the brave project helped her to improve or increase her income?
Translator:	Through the program I always harvest more and that case anytime I want to sell or if there's good market and I want to sell, I can always sell some to get money for myself.
Speaker 3:	Okay. How many bags has she been able to harvest as compared to the other years when the brave project was not there?
Translator:	The changes is that before this project I wasn't harvesting up to a bag, but through this project for now, maize for instance, I can get like eight to nine bags.
Shani Haruna:	Okay, that's nice. And then I think we're almost at the end of our discussion. So the last question is what needs to happen to improve what that access, in her opinion?
Translator:	In my opinion, I think if opinion leaders or maybe the leaders of these projects can get us more boreholes and rehabilitate our dam and also get us additional dug-outs, it would've help me.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So we'll like to say a very big thank you for your time and then for you sharing your experiences with us.
Translator:	She also appreciate. She tanks you for making her to voice out the knowledge that she has acquired through this project.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
