Shani Haruna:	This interview with 307, annon number 001. So sir, we'd like you to state your full name, your date of birth, and whether you are male or female.
307...:	Okay. My name is 307. I was born in 10th May, 1986 and I am a male.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And do you, hold any community position?
307...:	Yeah. I'm one of the executive of ...., I hold church position, but that one is just a district one. I'm a district men rep of Assemblies of God church. Okay.
Shani Haruna:	Are there other positions that you hold apart from the church position?
307...:	Only that I'm executive of ... We call it daka daka or groups, the susu groups I'm one of the executives, secretary.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So the other thing we would like to know is, we would like you to explain what your understanding of the brave project is. What do you know about the brave project?
307...:	Okay. My understanding towards the brave project is to help us to maybe come out from the poverty increase we are finding ourselves like climate change which we are facing during the previous years, which made us to maybe loose a lot of harvest and that one lead us to poverty level. So I've seen that the brave program have come to educate us how to ... That is how to maybe plant our maize or the time we suppose to plant our crops and how to go about it so that we will have a lot of harvests and will have a lot of harvests during the year. So that's what I have understood about the program brave.
Shani Haruna:	What other things did you learn about apart from the planting of the crops?
307...:	Yeah, I've learned that we should reserve water. Water reservation. And also they have taught us to maybe use nim trees and nuts to prepare insecticides which we can use to control some insects in our crops. Yeah, that's what I've learned.
Shani Haruna:	You mentioned you also learned something about water. What is it that you learned about the water?
307...:	Yeah, I say water because that we should reserve watering during the rain season so that when it is dry season, we can use that water maybe to wash our clothings, We can also use that water for our animals. And we can also use that water Maybe in case we want to maybe water some of the plants around our houses, we can use that water to water them.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. what did you also learn about groundwater?
307...:	Groundwater, that one is ... What I learned about groundwater is the water that we get it through down from the ground and that one is borehole water. And that's what I have learned about it.
Shani Haruna:	So we're now coming to talk about access to weather information and how you use the weather information. So we would like to know, how did you find out information about the weather last season?
307...:	Yeah, I had the information about the weather last season through brave program. So, they brought .... They came along with one of the weather forecasters man, and he trained us how we are going to go about the weather during the season. So sometimes too, we also hear it ... Also had information through radio programs like radio programs.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. which radio program did you get the information from?
307...:	That's ura radio from Bolga. We also get the radio program ... The information through that radio program.
Shani Haruna:	And apart from the radio program and then the brave project, which other sources did you get weather information from?
307...:	Sometimes you also get weather information from Garu Presby Agric Station and also MoFA from Garu.
Shani Haruna:	And how do they get the information to you? By what means do they use to get the information to you?
307...:	Yeah. Sometimes they ... Sometimes we get the information through them from radio media, that's on air, like Quality FM and the rest. They always go there and educate us how the season is going to be.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Then you mentioned you sometimes you get the information from the radio who normally uses the radio set that you listen to? Who normally owns it?
307...:	The owner of the radio pro.... The radio is .... We call him doctor Asana. He's a doctor living at Garu.
Shani Haruna:	Actually I'm referring to the wireless set and not the radio station. Yeah. who normally owns that wireless set in your household? And then who also uses it most? Is it men or women?
307...:	Okay. That one .... It's being owned by me and to me I would say I normally use it more than my wife or the ladies. We, the men normally use it more than the ladies because in the evening time you see the ladies, they will be there preparing food, but we will have chance to listen to the radio.
Shani Haruna:	So you also mentioned that you sometimes get weather information from the agric officers or mofa. How do you normally get access to the agric officers or MoFA?
307...:	Through radio program and sometimes too they sometimes organize a community maybe meetings or gathering and when we gather .... When we come together, they always come there and maybe educate us.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	Then apart from the sources that you have mentioned, the radio or the extension officers are there other sources where you get weather information from?
307...:	Sometimes I do get weather information from my colleagues in churches and in market squares.
Shani Haruna:	And what kind of weather information do you normally get from those people?
307...:	Yeah. That one is ... When it is ... Sometime when it is always getting to maybe raining season time, you see that they will make sure that the agric extension agents they will make sure that they broadcast it on air so that everybody will know when we supposed to start sowing our crops. And when we are expected of rain. Yeah. So through that one, maybe if I didn't have maybe a radio set to listen, sometimes my colleagues normally hear it and maybe also pass it to me.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So what we have been talking about is how you get access ... How you got access to information last season. So we're now coming to this season. How did you find out information about the weather this season? When I say this season ... The one that just ended. How did you get information about the weather?
307...:	I also get info .... This season I also get the information through brave program and also through agric station agents of ....Or agric station. It is through these areas that I normally got the weather program or yeah the weather program.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And what information did you hear? What did they say about the weather?
307...:	Yeah, this year what I heard about the weather during the beginning of the year, they said that this year there'll be rain ... There will be rain but the rain would not be ... It will be normal. It will not be too much and the gaps between the raining will always not be more than three or will not be more than three or four days intervals. So during the season we had this information, through brave program, and they told us that that is how the year is going to be.
Shani Haruna:	And did it much with what happened or how the rains went?
307...:	Yeah, actually, it really matched with what they have taught us.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So we're now coming to talk about the changes that you made in your farming activities as a result of you accessing the information. So what changes did you make in your farming activities because you accessed the weather information?
307...:	Yeah, through the weather information which I got, it really helped me during the season. Because when I had to the information I know that maybe probably I'm supposed to maybe sow my maize on this day. And actually ... I supposed to know that because there will be rain and the types of crops that I'm supposed to sow during the season and when I sowed those crops, really the crops really yield and I have a lot of harvests. So through ... Because it is through the weather program, either than that during the previous years when I didn't maybe have some like that anytime I want to maybe plant my crops or anything at all, I'll always plant it any how, because sometimes I can plant it and they'll be drought. Sometimes I can also plant it, maybe or like I can plant and there'll be no rain. That's why I said drought and there'll be no rain and those seeds that I used to plant can go on loss. So, but this season when we had the weather information, it help us to know when we suppose or the time we supposed to sow it and the type of crops we should use so that it can help us.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	So usually what time of the year do you start sowing your crops?
307...:	Yeah, this year we start sowing the crops during June. During June. That's June. If you want to plant something like maize they asked us to plant it during June 15th or yeah 15th going or 10th June going, yeah. If we plant during this time, those time between 15th June, that we will have a lot of harvest. So I plant my maize during June.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. so in the past, what time did you normally sow your crops?
307...:	Yeah. In the past because ... In the past when we just see that there is rain whether it is May or maybe April, sometimes we do sow. And because it is not time, you see the drought will come and all the plants or the crops will die. Yeah. Maybe because now we have the weather forecast information which they have been informing us we know the time we supposed to sow it and normally they say normally June is the time that we supposed to sow if we want to plant maize.
Shani Haruna:	So what other changes did you do apart from the sowing time?
307...:	Yeah. And through the information ... Yeah. They have educate us to maybe sow crops ... That's early crops that maybe we can harvest it in time so that when it is maybe when it is getting to October going, by that time and we have already harvest it which we may not face ... Maybe if there is no rain, we may not run into loss of it. So they educate us to sow a new variety of crops. Example of some of the new variety is one called sanza sima. Yeah, that one and some other .... And also they have educate us to sow ... We call it ... That's white millet. It's a millet but in our local dialect we call it naga white. But it is a white millet which we can harvest it maybe within three months.
Shani Haruna:	So the sanza sima what is that? What crop is it?
307...:	It's a maize crop. Because with that one it can withstand drought too and also mature in time. You can harvest it in time.
Shani Haruna:	How long does it .... How long does it take before it matures?
307...:	Maybe two and a half months. Getting to three months and it is ready for harvesting.
Shani Haruna:	So did you make changes to your animal rearing? Livestock farming.
307...:	Yeah. Really, I've made a changes to my animals rearing because when this program came they taught us how to maybe preserve some stalks so that during the dry season we can use those stalks to feed our animals. They also taught us how to keep them clean and that one they said we should keep their ... Where ... Their surroundings, where the houses of the animals like goat and sheep. That was always sweep those places, make those places clean so that that one will make them healthy and it'll also help them from maybe getting some infection. So really it has helped us a lot.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So the weather information that you received, in the future, what would be the best way for you to receive it? The weather information.
307...:	To me. Okay. I would like to say in the future ... I would like to say if they can maybe broadcast it through the international broadcasting radios rather than the FM stations. Because the FM station, sometimes the channels didn't reach some areas. So but if it is international one I know everybody will be able to have the information and it will help everybody and not only me alone.
Shani Haruna:	Apart from those too which other ways or means do you think will work best for you and the people here?
307...:	Okay. One way of maybe spreading the information I would say if they get some agents that will be going from community to community, maybe and educating or giving the information. Sometimes some people may not have time to listen to the radios. So but if maybe we have some agents moving to the communities, educating us, maybe it will help us a lot to have the information.
Shani Haruna:	Then you mentioned international stations, like ... Can you explain more about the the international stations and that you mentioned?
307...:	That one, I mean, if they can maybe like GBC or TV3 sometimes too, and that one, many people have access to or many people have access to it. So if they can also have their program through these areas.
Shani Haruna:	So you mean that national stations?
307...:	Yeah, the national stations.
Shani Haruna:	Sodo you think men listen to radio more than a women here in your community?
307...:	Yeah, actually to me, I would say most ... The men do listen to the radio more than the ladies. Because always if you see the ladies always, the ladies are always engaged in some activities. But the men, sometimes have some chances to listen to the radio more than the ladies, especially maybe if it is in the evening time you see that the lady will be there, she will be there preparing the food or after the food she will try to maybe see how best she can do and maybe bath her children. After bathing the children, you see that she will be tired and will not have time to maybe listen to the radio again. But we the men maybe after work when we came home, we have no any other things disturbing us a lot. So most men do listen to the radio more than ladies.
Shani Haruna:	And do you also think that .... Or let me say men and women, who do you think have more radio sets than the other?
307...:	To me, I would say the men, have radio sets than the ladies because the ladies since they have no time to listen with that one they don't have interest of maybe forcing themselves to get the radio set. But because the men have time to listen to the radio most men are always trying how best they can do maybe to get the radio sets. So with that one the men have radio sets more than the ladies.
Shani Haruna:	And do men have more phones than women here?
307...:	Yeah. Okay. In this community, what I observe ... Yeah it's actually true that the men have more phones than the the ladies because comparing the financial side here most men are able to maybe have so many activities doing, but the ladies, no. So because of that ... So because of that, most men have phones more than the ladies.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Then how often do agric extension officers visit to give you information about your farming activities?
307...:	Agric informations, Yeah, they normally give us the information right from the beginning of the rain season. Like maybe if it is March they will create awareness of us that we are getting to season, we should prepare towards it. They will ask us maybe to like gathering of rubbish, spreading of compost and preparing towards it. So when it is always May time, you see that they will also start giving us the information that it is time. So most farmers should be ready and maybe by June when we... Maybe by June 15th or 14th when we get rain that we should start sowing. We shouldn't wait. And after that, maybe July or August ... July and sometimes they always go round and maybe educate us how to apply the fertilizer. They normally say that when applying the fertilizer, when the weather is wet, we shouldn't apply fertilizer, We should wait so that the dew or moist can maybe evaporate small before we can apply the fertilizer. And sometimes too they also go round educating us how to use the weedicide normally called condemn, normally educate us how to use it so that maybe it may not harm us. And even not only us maybe if we didn't know how to use it sometimes it can also harm us. It can also kill our animals. It can also even killed the crops in which We are ready to maybe .... We have sowed it.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So do they normally visit you at the farm or they organize a meeting and give out the information? Or how do they normally give out the information? By what means do they give out the information?
307...:	Yeah. Sometimes they always organize a meeting. Normally that's what they've been doing. They always organize a meeting or give us the information that maybe by this day they will have meeting and the venue will be here and they are expecting most farmers to be there. So when we come together, they'll give us the information. And also they normally ask us maybe if any farmer has any problem with his maybe farming activities, that farmer can draw them attention. With that one, they can come maybe to that person individually and attend the problem that he is facing. So sometimes too, they always ... They normally come to our maybe farm site and see. Like this year and last year there are some insects, they'll call it .... Some insects came and they were chopping mostly the maize, so most of the agric extension officers ... They normally go around and are inspecting. If they come to your farm and see that the insects are there, then they'll ask you to provide maybe your ID card, your name, yeah, your ID card number, your name. If you are able to provide that one, they'll give you some insecticides so that you can use to spray the farm.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. then what information do the agric extension officers normally give you about water management and the weather?
307...:	Yeah, really the normally say water is life and for that matter we should know how to maybe use the water that we are getting like in our boreholes or maybe there is some dig-out, we should know how to manage with it so that we can use it usefully for a purpose and not just to waste it any how. And the weather too, yeah, they normally ... Maybe sometimes too they normally give us the information about the weather like maybe, back at here especially at this our Kusaagu traditional area ... I don't know whether it's throughout the nation or it is only just this area, when it is normally getting to rain season sometimes we normally experience a lot of heavy rainstorm which normally blow our houses away. So when it is always getting to seasons time they normally create awareness of us to prepare our houses very well. Sometimes they will let us use some ... Like the grass houses ... We should use some ropes to maybe tie them. And even maybe the zinc or the iron sheet houses, sometimes they will ask us to maybe lay it very well. So that, and they also draw our attention that maybe by this time we will experience a heavy storm and for that matter they expect that when it is that time, we shouldn't be away from farm or we shouldn't be away. Or when we see that maybe the rain is maybe threatening, we should always run to maybe our houses rather than maybe being in the farm or go and hiding maybe under trees which can cause maybe harm to us.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Then what crops do you farm?
307...:	For the crop side I farm so many types of crops. When it is raining season I farm millet maize, soybeans, groundnuts, rice, and some other crops. Sometimes vegetable crops too. I used to maybe plant those ones.
Shani Haruna:	So the crops that you mentioned how did you find out information about them last season?
307...:	Yeah. Information about them ... Yeah, I had the information through brave and agric station about them.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And what kind of information did you find about your crops?
307...:	Yeah. the information I found about my crops is, something like soybeans, yeah, they informed us that when we sow maize, maybe after one week going, we should sow maize on it. Like we should sow maize to make it as a mixed cropping. That the soybeans, there are some nutrients in it. So when we sow it, it helped the ... After harvesting, the next year, it helped the maybe the ground to retain its fertility so that when we sow any thing at all, we see that we will have a lot of harvest in it. And sometimes too, when we sow something like maize, you see that the leaves of it will cover the ground making the ground not to dry in time.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So the season that just ended, how did you find out information about the crops?
307...:	Yeah. The same brave and agric station and MoFA.
Shani Haruna:	And what kind of information did you find out?
307...:	Yeah, this year through brave program. They educate us when we are sowing maybe something like maize or any crop that tall that we should space them. We should space it which will help the crop to be able to maybe grow very well. If we didn't space it, there will be no air blowing through them. So yeah, educate us to maybe space our crops, when sowing.
Shani Haruna:	Then in the future, what would be the best way for you to receive such information?
307...:	Okay. In the future. Okay. The best way to receive those information, I would like it to be on air so that most of the farmers will be able to have access for the information. But if they can also have maybe agents, yeah ... Community agents that can be also going round like the way they are doing too, it is good. But I prefer being it on air or having it broadcast through radios. Yeah. I believe that one will maybe help us or will help many people to have access about the information.
Shani Haruna:	How did you find the well monitoring training that you received? Well monitoring.
307...:	Okay. With that one I don't know much about that because I didn't receive any training maybe concerning that one.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	So we're now coming to talk about gender and then access to information. In your opinion do you think men and women have access to different information?
307...:	Information ... Yeah to me ... Yeah. I would say men and women, Yeah, they have access to maybe different informations really.
Shani Haruna:	So what kind of information do men get and what kind of information do a women get?
307...:	Yeah, most men get some information through their colleagues, like how to maybe be with their wives or how to handle their family affairs and so forth and most ladies too have information through their maybe colleague ladies on how to maybe handle or how to be with their husbands, how to cater for the children and how to manage in the house activities and so forth. So these are the information that I believe Men had women also had.
Shani Haruna:	So assuming somebody ... Like a new information is coming into your community, who do you think will get it first? Men or women?
307...:	Yeah, mostly most of the information when any information is just about to spread in my community, I would say most of the ladies have the information first rather than the men. So the ladies had the information first.
Shani Haruna:	Why is that the case?
307...:	Yeah, the case is just because most men don't like talking. So but ladies anywhere they have come together you see that they'll be giving more information ... They like talking. So, and because of that they normally get the information but most men don't like talking. And most men too when maybe he had the information, he always keep it by himself. But when a lady hear may be any information at all, oh within some minutes will be trying how best she can do so that she can also pass the information to maybe a colleague person. That's how most ladies used to have the information first than the men.
Shani Haruna:	Among the men and women here, who do you think gets more information about water?
307...:	To me in this community, about water I would say most ladies do get the information than men.
Shani Haruna:	Why do most women get more information about water than men?
307...:	Because they say water is life, and maybe if a household is .... You know, it's the duty of the ladies to see how best they can do so that they will get water into the house so that they can use for preparing of meals. They can use it for bathing, they can use it for washing their clothes and they can also use it to give it to their husbands to maybe do some other things like bathing or giving it to maybe some animals. Because, most of the time it is the duty of the ladies to do that. That's how most ladies have the information of water than the men.
Shani Haruna:	And the fact that women have more information about water than men, does that affect the relationship between men and women?
307...:	Okay. With that one sometimes ..... I would say sometimes it affects the ladies because men .... Because it is the duty of the lady maybe to struggle how best she can do it to get the water, most men don't care whether there is water or not. Most men, they don't care maybe to help the lady and maybe see how they can do to get water or maybe dig out or maybe find out where they can get water. So because of that it always affects the ladies a lot because if there are no maybe ...if there are shortage of water it is the lady who is going to maybe suffer a lot and get water for the family.
Shani Haruna:	Okay, we're now coming to talk about water usage, management and disagreements.
Shani Haruna:	So the first thing we will like to discuss is how do you plan your water usage?
307...:	Yeah, my water usage, the way I plan it is, maybe like if they go to the borehole and maybe brings water in to the household, I always ask them not to be pouring it away anyhow, but they should use it ... Maybe if they want to prepare food, they should know how to use it or if they want to wash their clothings there's they should know how to use the water or if maybe in case we have, we have planted some maybe flowering or any plants around the household, I always ask maybe my wife and the children to always maybe take the water that would be okay for one plant and not that they should just maybe fetch the water anyhow which can maybe if they go to water the plant part of it will just maybe run away going waste. So that's how I plan with my maybe water usage.
Shani Haruna:	And how has the brave project helped you to manage water better?
307...:	Yeah. The brave program has helped us to manage water better. Yeah. But asking us maybe if we can afford something like polytanks or if we can use something like cement and built something like a tank or we call it a reservoir, if we can use cement and do that one, so that during the rain season, when it is raining, we can make a source in to the Polytank or the reservoir, so that the water can be passing through it. And when it is dry season, then we can then be using that water maybe for watering the plants around us, giving it to animals, maybe washing of clothes so that when the ladies go for the borehole water we can use that one for preparation of food and drinking. That's how maybe I have plan with my water usage.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And the water sources that you mentioned the boreholes and then the wells do you have committees in charge of managing those water sources?
307...:	Yeah, in our community here whether it is a borehole or a well, even if it is even a dam, we have committees or executives guiding it. Yeah. Other than that, if we don't have maybe executive or some people taking care of or guiding it, maybe you see that sometimes, if like a borehole, maybe in case it spoil, it is the duty of the executives that they will ask the community members to come together, maybe and see how best they can be able to maintain it. If they cannot maintain it by themselves, then they will contribute money so that they can get somebody who, who can maybe repair it for them. So either it is a well or a borehole or even a dam ... We have a dam here. We have executive who are taking care of it, seeing how best they can manage with it or manage with the water so that we can use it for watering our onions and the rest.
Shani Haruna:	And how many people in the committee?
307...:	Normally in the committee we normally have the chairperson and sometimes the vice, the secretary and the treasurer the organizer. And even in the .... Maybe when it is a borehole ... We have one borehole in our community. We have some people, we have chosen some executives. Those executives will be responsible for maybe sweeping around it so that the borehole will also look neat.
Shani Haruna:	Would you say the use of the water sources ... The boreholes, wells and then dam results in disagreements?
307...:	Yeah, sometimes that but not always, because something like in the boreholes, sometimes most of ... Especially the ladies they can go there to fetch water, and maybe you see that some person may say that, Oh, I've come first before you. Or some may come and that, oh excuse me to fetch the water because I'm in a harry and the person who is before her will not agree. Sometimes it's normally come to maybe disagreement between them and even in the wells it's the same thing. In the dam too .... Because the dam we are using it for watering our vegetables, crops and so forth. You see to it that some people will say, oh you are maybe ... Because there is ... There are some .... In the dam, we have some place, we call it "paa kpiik". They normally open it so that the water can pass through that area to the crop side. You see that some people would complain that, Oh, that you have over open it. And others would say, Oh, that it's normal. So sometimes it normally bring disagreement.
Shani Haruna:	And how are those disagreements normally resolved?
307...:	Those disagreement it's only just a ... To me I only see it's normally just a minor one. So it's normally just a minor one. So sometimes maybe in the disagreement they will come to maybe understand each other within some shortest possible time. It's just a minor minor one.
Shani Haruna:	So how has the brave Project helped in improving some of these disagreements that you mentioned about?
307...:	Yeah, the brave programs have helped improved these disagreements. That's why they have, yeah, maybe educate us maybe to have polytanks and water reservoirs which maybe during the rain season, we can get water to store in them. So that when it is maybe dry season, maybe you have gone to the borehole side to fetch water for something and you went and there are peoples, because there are some extra water in the house, you can come back maybe manage with that one and maybe return later. Yeah. That's how they have helped us manage with the water problems.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. then what do you think needs to happen to improve water access and management in your community?
307...:	Yeah. To me, I will suggest if maybe NGOs, the government or any sectors maybe can be able to provide more boreholes, more Wells and more dams in the needed places, it will help as a lot maybe minimize those problems.
Shani Haruna:	And how has brave helped to improve your income?
307...:	Yeah, brave has helped me a lot to improve my income through the wearing of animals. During the season, they have taught us how to cater for them, how to look ..., how to maybe inject them, how to feed them and through that one .... Because every year we used to lost most of our animals and because brave has come, most of our animals, we don't lost them as we used to lost them before. So because of that, it has helped us improve in our income generation activities.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	Is there any other information you would like to share with us apart from the ones that we have discussed?
307...:	Yeah, apart from the one that we discussed maybe the information that I would like to add is, these days I don't know but have seen to it that there are divorces throughout the areas, and not only that one, we also experience most teenage pregnancy among students and even in communities. I will suggest if they can help us maybe see how best they can do so that to minimize teenage pregnancy among students and misunderstanding between ladies and their husbands which result into divorce.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	We'll like to say thank you so much for your time and then the experiences that you have shared with us.We are so happy and grateful to you for sharing those experiences with us.
307...:	Okay. Thank you.
