Shani Haruna:	This is interview with 308, annon number 011. We would like you to state your full name, your date of birth and whether you are male or female.
308 :	My name is 308 and then I was born in 20th January 1976. I'm a male in gender.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And do you hold any position here?
308 :	No sir.
Shani Haruna:	And then we'll like you to explain what your understanding of the brave project is. What do you know about the brave project?
308 :	Yeah, the brave project is a learning process in which farmers need to have an idea and then as compared to the climate change, how our farming processes goes on, rearing animals and then all what you can talk about farming. So it gives new knowledge and as I said, it is a learning process in which brave is giving to farmers.
Shani Haruna:	Sowhat did you learn under the brave project?
308 :	Yeah. Under the brave project I learned on how we...., the sowing time and then the time we need to apply fertilizer, the time we know we can identify or we determine that this crop is ready for harvesting. And then after harvesting how you keep your products for your expense, either we spend, consume some or you save. So advisories from brave make me understand how we're doing in the community here.
Shani Haruna:	Then, what did you also learn about water under the brave project?
308 :	Yeah, I've learned how we can harvest water for our crops or for our animal rearing. When it is time for the raining season to set off, you have to..., If you want to farm, look at your farm and then you determine how to plough across because if the water is going...., you find the farm slope. So we farm across the slope so that water would not come and wipe the upper soil and then leave it empty. Then apart from that we also made some drums, in order to harvest water till the time rain is not there we can use it for our animals or some of our crops that is nearer in the house.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. What did you also learn about boreholes or wells?
308 :	Yeah, I learned that boreholes are source of water or good drinking water in which individuals or everybody need to adapt using those boreholes or wells. Then, sometimes the wells we use and then the boreholes for our household practice or household consumption and animals. So the boreholes, here we don't have much wells. We use the boreholes for our household activities.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. then what did you also learn about groundwater under the brave project?
308 :	Yeah, we've learnt on the groundwater that, if the groundwater, if you dig the groundwater, that is what we've learn that some of them have disease, like germs which can lead us into sickness. But, the rainwater, if you take the rain water directly that water is different from the groundwater. What I know about it from experts, those who knows the differences in water.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. We're now coming to talk about access to weather information and how you use the weather information in your farming activities. So the first thing we would like to discuss is.... The previous season, last season before the season which just ended. In that particular season, how did you find out information about the weather?
308 :	Yeah. that season, I was access to the information on the weather from the weather forecasters through radio and then community meetings. And then we also joining with district assembly the time they have their PSP meetings. So they always called some of us to be part and then send the information back to the community. That is where I was having access to the information last year.
Shani Haruna:	You mentioned PSP. What is a PSP?
308 :	PSP means Planning Scenario Participation.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Thenapart from those sources that you mentioned, which other source did you get information from? Apart from the radio, the PSP or the district assembly, which other source did you get weather information from?
308 :	Yeah, if we have community meetings here, we spread the information to each other. That is where I got to hear some information. And then again, and on my phone, sometimes the information we're given so that you when the message comes and you read, you get to know information, what the weather forecasters are saying.
Shani Haruna:	So the message that are sent to you in your phone, where does it come from? Who sends you those messages?
308 :	Yeah, actually at first gmet was sending the information through mobile phones so that we can have access to what is going to happen today or tomorrow. And then now.... That one was individuals. But now a message will come from the MTN that, this will happen tomorrow this time, or that will happen. So that is some of the place I also have access to.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So how about this season? The season that just ended, how did you find out information about the weather?
308 :	It's through the mobile phones and then community meetings. This year we didn't join the district assembly for those meetings.
Shani Haruna:	So, apart from those ones did you get weather information from another source?
308 :	Weather information comes from those sources I've mentioned earlier. Gmet also came here and have a meeting with us. They explained how the rains will come this year. So due to their explanation, actually it happens, so it helps us to plan and then sow our crops, determining the time the rain will stop and then the time... The time the rain will come and then the time it will stop. So they use us..... They are comparing us to manga Bawku, that is why we have gotten access to the information. They said whatever is happening there, they believe that it is the same thing happening. And actually it happens. So the time they predicted that the rain rains and then those that they have, they said it has happened. So it help us to plan before sowing just this last season.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And then the weather information that you got, what changes did you do in your farming activities as a result of you getting the weather information?
308 :	Actually, the weather information help in my farming as compared to the last, the previous time. Due to the weather information, the sowing and then I when to apply the fertilizer, you have to look at the weather and then, if you hear from the weather forecasts that tomorrow the rain will come, or there was a time and they said the rain will rain about five days non-stopping. So that time we those farmers who want to apply fertilizer, we couldn't just.... We applied the fertilizer before those come and after that one too they always give information to us so that we know when it will rain or when it won't rain, and due to the one we were able to follow by it. And sometimes their prediction may not be accurate because it can rain here but the next community may not have a rain. So that doesn't mean that their prediction doesn't go by what they said. What they said It help us or me in particular, it helped me.
Shani Haruna:	So what specific activities did you use the information to do? Maybe if you can give us some examples of the activities that information helped you to be able to do in your farming?
Speaker 2:	Yeah. That time you know, there was ..... That time was and the early maturity crops the we sowed. Some people, harvested theirs and then due to rain they couldn't get any sun to dry. So, but some of us who had access to the information, we waited till that time passed. When we harvested, we were able to get enough sun to dry our crops. I in particular I was one. So my .... We call .... This nagaret and then the cowpea. So those millet that time that they were ready for harvest, but due to the rain, we couldn't harvest them. Some of us stopped till the rain passed. But those that haven't had access to it, some of them harvest and it spoilt, it germinated. So those activities, we were able to ..... Then on my onion farming too, people nursed their onions, not having the information that the rain will come for five or six days before stopping. They nursed it and then when that rain come, those who transplant that time and those who nursed rain washed it away. So it means that those activities, I was not part of some of those that spoilt because I had the information. So those that have the information also were not affected.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. how about your livestock? Did you use the information to make some changes in your livestock rearing?
308 :	Yes. livestock rearing they made us to understand that building their rooms have to be different from the previous building which our fathers were doing. If you have your livestock and you want to accommodate them, your building must have some .... During the course of your building you put up some holes so that air will be going in the time these animals will be inside. So air will be going and then the hotness would not harmed them, because too much of hot can bring in diseases for .... So we have changed the style of building our animal rooms and then again, how we feed our animals. Previously we just open them to the bush to the time they are back. Some will not even come back. But due to the learning process that we acquired the knowledge we are able to bring changes to our animal rearing.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So in the future, what do you think is the best way for you to receive such weather information?
308 :	Yeah. In the future, what I intend of receiving weather information is from the mobile phone messages and then radio and then community meetings as to how the rain or when the season set off this will happen, this will not happen. This will .... We should suppose to do this in terms of prevention ourselves and our animals and what have you. And again, what I want to say, is like the CARE link us to the district assembly and then we wrote our community action plans. Whatever we want in the community or any other support. And if you have a disaster, we go direct to them. We need not to pass through the assembly member or any of the big men before we get to the DCE or the district assembly. So just, two or three years back now that one has stopped. So to me, if we get there, if we get back there during the course of the meeting, they speak Kusaal for our people, our opinion leaders to understand what is happening. But without those meetings receiving mobile information cannot help all the peoples than participating the meeting to hear the Ghanaian language speak because most of us cannot read and understand what to see we only hear the information on phone.
Shani Haruna:	So for you you think the best way is to have a community meeting where the information can be shared for everybody to understand?
308 :	So if we called a community meeting for everybody to be there, the inflammation will be given. Even if we call a community meeting and then we can invite the Ghana Meteorological Service people who can be part of us. They will tell us what will happen maybe at the course of the year. So we'll get to know and then prepare. If we had a committee meeting, we can invite those people to come. And then during the community meeting too, we have our local people who said they can perform what and what and then the rain comes. During the meetings, they always call these people to be part and explain, if you see this know that this is what is going to happen. If it is raining shouldn't handle this. This year, they will be, it's going to be a lot of thunders, disasters, what and what. All will be explained to the community to understand because a lot of us cannot hear English.
Shani Haruna:	Then, you also mentioned about radio. Among the men and women here, who do you think listen more to radio? Is it men or women?
308 :	Actually, here due to the education that comes, which makes some women have time to listen to radio. But, previously it was only men who have radios to listen. In the evening the women we'll inside their kitchens cooking and not mine about unless the man listen to the news or the information and then later on transfer it to her. Some of them too, they don't have, they are not allowed to buy wireless or radios which they'll be using personally. If you buy ...... If they buy a radio, in the evening the landlord will open it. He will have time sitting, listening to the news and information, but the woman will be at the kitchen and then doing her work. So after that, the woman ...., the man too will tell her they have announced this, this will happen. But now a few women are able to have access to their radios but not much.
Shani Haruna:	So why are women not allowed to buy radio as you mentioned?
308 :	Yeah, it is ..... It was a .... Maybe it was our tradition that if you are a woman and you buy your own radio and your husband too has his own radio means that you are challenging the man. So that fears they have. So then, like previously we have meeting like this women were not allowed to lead, take leadership, women were not part and then our farming women were not having access to land to farm. Just through this brave education made some women have access to farm on their own and then to make their own fertilizer like compost that we talk. So there are certain things in the community here they have now changed due to the education given by brave.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And then, do think men have more phones than women. And why is that so? If it is so.
308 :	Yeah, now the phones ..... The mobile phones I can say many women have phones than the men. Yeah. I know a lot of men in the community here they don't have time with phones. So women, because they have a lot of their ... Their wards are at Kumasi and this mobile money, if they made the mobile money to me to be giving it to my wife, I may not give it. So it made my wife to have eager to have her own phone to be chatting with the son anytime they want. So as for mobile phones, many women have phones than men in the community.
Shani Haruna:	Then, how often do agric extension officers visit here to give information to you?
308 :	Yeah. though they are not many in the system, whenever we sense of any danger like maybe if a disease and pests disturb our crops, then maybe animals, diseases, if we give the information to them, they can come and convene the meeting, explain to us how we can handle it and so that it won't disturb us. And then, sometimes when the season is about to set off, they'll call us .... How the fertilizer system or how the farm, the season .... In collaboration with gmet they have those similar information to be given. So they can call community meetings and then we come out and they came and make the information for us.
Shani Haruna:	So at those meetings do they provide you information about water management and the weather?
308 :	Yeah, those meetings, they provide information like that, like ploughing across the slope in which water will not just run and leave you or spoil the soil and leave the crop standing empty. So they advise that if you plough across the water will not just run and leave it, the water will stay for some time and then the crop will be able to use it. If without that one the water can just run and leave the crop standing alone
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So we're now coming to talk about access to crop information and how you use the information? So what crops do you farm?
308 :	Yeah, I farm maize, beans, rice, bambara beans and soybeans, and sweet potato too.
Shani Haruna:	So the crops that you have, I mentioned did you plant all of them last season?
308 :	Yes.
Shani Haruna:	And how did you get information about them? Like for instance, if any of them had a disease or if any of the crops was not doing well or if you needed a particular variety, where did you get such information from?
308 :	Yeah, actually the crops that I've mentioned, all of them have a new variety. Yeah. Like first we're doing only millet, but now the maize has a different variety, about three or four types. Then the same thing to the soybeans, the bambara beans, those ones they also have a type and then the sweet potato have a type and then all the varieties, they have so many types. And then if you want to hear information about how, if maybe pest comes to disturb any of them we contact mofa to find out the prescribe chemical to use on the crops so that it wouldn't destroy it. So we had those information from MoFA and then some of us are able to reach SARI manga for the new variety.
Shani Haruna:	So the new varieties that you mentioned, how did you get to know about them?
308 :	Yeah, from the agric extension officers.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And what did they tell you about it that made you to start to use them?
308 :	Yeah, they have ...., it is ..., it is farming. Farming is their work. So the rain pattern that which is not matching with the crops that we normally sow. So due to the rainfall pattern, they have link with gmet to know the crops that will match with the rain. So if you have crops that are drought resilient, so they identify them and then directed us where to get it. So that we went there and had those crops.
Shani Haruna:	So how about the season that just ended? How did you find information about your crops? Where did you get the information?
308 :	Yeah, we had the information from new radio announcements that farmers should change because this time the rain doesn't follow how it was. So the rain pattern has change. Farmers should adapt to the new method of farming by using the new variety and then those that can yield plenty product for us. So in fact the agric people are able to link us by going to the radio station, then calling community meetings to explain to us to understand that we need to change and follow the crops that are resilient with the rain.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So in the future, what do you think would it be the best way for you to receive such Information?
308 :	Yeah. In the future, the best way for us to receive the information is like, I talk of the mobile phone information, the radios and then meetings. So that we're hearing the information when we gather. Then I also like to say maybe MoFA or CARE, if they able to also terrain like we had community Monitors who normally go for a meeting, have the information back to the community here. It was happening, but now it, it look as if it is not active as it was. So that if those people are there, they'll go and take the information, come back and give it to the community. You know, every day we had a VSLA meetings and then if you know that this people have gathered there, the volunteer can just go there and then after the meeting he the give the information to them to also know what is happening. If they do that, I know that getting information to farming will be easier for us.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And then what changes did you make as a result of you hearing the information on the radio?
308 :	Yeah, the changes I did is ..... Like on my farming, if the rain comes the time you need to apply the fertilizer, it is at stake because I know one year after the rains I couldn't wait small for the water to go down small before I apply the fertilizer. So I made the fertilizer application to these crops. Just two hours or after the day, you come and see that the colour of the crops change and it tend to what ... It didn't produce yield better. So I know due those information and then, I didn't repeat such a thing because I've heard what they advise to do, and then waking up early morning using fertilizer to apply crops. They have advises us not to do that. You have to watch the weather and know that supposed to apply or I should stop applying.
Shani Haruna:	So when you watch the weather, how would you know whether it is good for you to apply the fertilizer or it's not good for you to apply the fertilizer?
Speaker 2:	Yeah. Even if you didn't hear information from the weather forecast that today or tomorrow it will rain. And daybreak, if you get up, if you look at the weather sometimes, the weather will change. You see the clouds forming. And then that tells you that we're likely to have a rain that time, or if you see the weather, the wind is not blowing and then it hazy or so like it is shining. So when you see that the day is not clear and the sun is not coming or all that clear. There'll be a day too early morning you see that the sun will start shining and then, the heat will tell you that something will happen today. So there are two different things in the weather there. If the weather is cool and then determine from the clouds, it can be also shining and also determine from the clouds.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	So we're now coming to discuss about the well monitoring training. How did you find the well monitoring training that you received? Well monitoring.
308 :	Yeah. how I understand or find it to be is, when you are measuring the water down in the ground, you give advisories to your people. The time that you put the water goes deep we likely may happen that this borehole may not have water, enough water. So in the morning till evening, just in the morning that they will have some water. But in the evening time, maybe likely not to get water. If it is a well you can see that the water sometimes others will fetch and you go and it finish. So until you wait, it means that the water got finished, goes down inside the ground. So if you measure and the water is up, let the people know how to use it. If you measure it and the water is not enough. Maybe people wants to build, you can advise them maybe to go somewhere and then fetch where the water is plenty. But if you mean to build or to do .... And maybe some are brewers, you can't get enough water to do those activities. So taking the water level in the ground, give us this information to understand so that we don't run short of water anytime we are in need of.
Shani Haruna:	So how were you measuring the water level?
308 :	Yeah, we had an old well in which we use a tape measure. We dip it inside the well with certain metals. Immediately the metal hits the water you would get to know that the metal has gotten .... The end has gotten to the metal. So you remove it. You just hold it there, look at the meter, then you write it inside the room, the time and then how cool or shiny the weather is, you write the time. So, and then the figure
Shani Haruna:	And then those measurements that you took or you made, how would you use them to make changes to your water use in the future?
308 :	Yeah, that is what I said it earlier. If you measure it and then you get to find out that the the level that they dig the well to, water is still plenty, you get to know. If you measure it and the water is not enough in the well. You get to know. So we use this information, tell our people that this time if we joke, we won't get water for our household use. So we have to wait. If you want to build, maybe there is a time you know that there's plenty water and you start building.
Shani Haruna:	Then what other information would you like more information about? Apart from the well monitoring, what other activities would you like more information about with regards to water?
308 :	Yeah, I would like to if, what .... Ghana water commission or what do you call them? If they put or throw their eyes back to the communities. Not only this community alone. We learned that going ...., if you ..... Some boreholes if you fetch the water, you can see that germs will be inside there. So the germs you can take it in and it will harm you and then we don't know how to go by this. So these ones we need to know that if it is this, we are approaching this person for that help. And then, this person is responsible for giving out maybe chemical or the resources that we need to change the water. So we do it. Or else if something like that happens or if the borehole spoil, we always suffer, then contribute money and how to get them it's difficult for us ...., for them to come. If work access maybe in the radio announcement, if we maybe we can be saying that if you are confronted with this problem, like borehole do this, do this, or come to this place for the information or do it. We like it to that ..... So.
Shani Haruna:	Okay,
Shani Haruna:	So we're now coming to talk access to information by both men and women. So in your opinion, do you think men and women have access to different information?
308 :	Yes. As a information on this chieftaincy woman were not part. Even now, some of them are part, but it doesn't ..., they don't have a say, they only listen to what the men say on the chieftaincy side, and the women too also have their information in which men are not even part. Like maybe they have their groups and like the magazia can call women for advisories,as to stay with their maybe families and then, those advises women talk. Maybe sometimes they also gather and talk and men too also maybe in the house like this, the men has a decision in which the women may not take part, like family matters, if not ..., if you are not alone with your wife, if your wife is there, the male ..., the boys or the sons and the father they have a decision in which the woman and the girls inside the house don't even know.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So you mentioned chieftaincy issues. So apart from those ones, what other information regarding development that men and women have differently?
308 :	Yeah, with regards to development, we now have equal information because not only a man can develop a community, but when you come together, a woman can have her support somewhere and then the man too can have a support somewhere. We give out our views ..., like I said we call a meeting to find out who is capable of leading us to this place to have this one to support us develop. So that is why we now have, assembly women and then the men being assembly member. And at the same too, the unit committee and then looking at the chieftaincy side I was talking of ...., may they're also selecting nayili kpema, tendana, what and what, those ones women are not also part.
Shani Haruna:	So why are they not part?
308 :	Yeah. Yeah. They are not Part because men, the role that men can play women cannot play that role. The role that women can also play, they are playing inside. But coming outside to boast that, I am the elder to this chief ...., no. Even if they have the mangazia and then after taking the decision, the chief and the elders will call the mangazia to come and also listen and then give it back to the colleagues or the women.
Shani Haruna:	So when it comes to issues or information about water, do you think men have more information about water than (wo)men? Do you think men have more information about water or women have or get more information about water than men?.
308 :	Yeah. as for water side women had more information than men. Here, men doesn't go to fetch water if not only a single persons, one, one. So women ...., that's their duty to fetch water, prepare food for the family, Fetch water for Washing. And if we are building self the women have to fetch water for us to build. So men doesn't have much information on water than Women. Women had a lot of information from water.
Shani Haruna:	So does that affect the relationship between men and women? The fact that the women have more information about about water, does it in any way affect how the women and men are living peacefully here?
308 :	Yeah. Yeah. It doesn't affect anything because anything about water if the woman hears the information about water, if it is maybe contributing money to repair a borehole or coming out to help physically to repair or make any maybe a dug-out if they go to inform the men they'll come out and do it, because women sometimes cannot lift heavy things. So for that one we understand that what is your duty. You know your duty. I also know my duty and we live peacefully in the community.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So we're now coming to talk about water use, management and disagreements? So what do you normally use water for?
308 :	We use water for feeding our animal, then for household use, then use for building. So I think this is what we use water for.
Shani Haruna:	What about farming?
308 :	Yeah. Okay. We also use water for farming. Yeah.
Shani Haruna:	So, in those activities that you just mentioned, what has allowed you to be able to plan your water use around those activities?
308 :	Yeah, as for those activities, all the waters we use we have different, different types of water. We don't just use ..., maybe we can use borehole water for everything, but it might not be enough. Or if we are many going in for borehole to Fetch water for building, this person will be building and another person will be building somewhere and women will like to fetch and go for cooking and then maybe others want to fetch and go for washing. So we sometimes use the .... Maybe the rain water that we conserve. So, the Wells and some of us who are not far from the dam we also use the .... In other not to suffer before getting water.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So how has the brave helped you to manage water better? The brave project, how has it helped you to manage your water better?
308 :	Yeah, the brave project help us to manage ....., to be able to manage the little water that we have. When it is raining they made us to know that that water is even having more nutrients ...., that water is even is good than the one in the ground we are fetching. And then on our farm side, they ask us and then teach us, when it is raining, then you can make maybe a ridge to prevent water, not to just Slope and then leave the crop standing. And again by not ...., if you sow your crops and you think that all the time it get dried, maybe if you make something like get some grass and then cover it ..., let's say mulching. You cover it so that the wetness will take a long time before it dries, Which could not disturb the crop. So due to those learning we've learned from brave we use and then actually it helped us.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And then you mentioned boreholes, Wells and dams. Do you have organizations here or groups here that are responsible for managing those water sources? The boreholes, wells and then the dams?
308 :	Yeah. actually, district assembly always give us the boreholes. And some NGOs too also come and give us the boreholes. They'll select community members, give them training on how to repair it if it spoils and how to handle it with care in terms of if it spoil, and again the durability, how to handle it so that it will be durable. They 'll call community members and then train them to handle it, and as for maintenance and what and What ..., if we ..., if it spoils we contribute, we have contributions lying down for repairs. So we don't have an NGO or any other person somewhere who can come and then say your borehole .... If it spoils call us to come and maintain it for you. Sometimes if not the politicians ... The time they want their votes if your borehole or your dam needs repairs that time, there that maybe they'll help you small to do it because of votes.
Shani Haruna:	And then how many people are in the management groups? How many are they? Like for each of the groups, how many members are in each group? The boreholes and then the dams or even the Wells?
308 :	The boreholes we have the chairman who always schedule days for the meeting. We have the organizer who will go around inform the .... Give the information that this day we'll meet and discuss about this. We also have the Treasurer, the money that we are contributing ... Those people we have them, and we also have two peoples who are supporting them do the work. So I know about five. We have borehole leaders.
Shani Haruna:	Then in selecting those people, what do you normally look out for before you select them to be member of that group?
308 :	Yeah, we always call a community meeting or let's say a borehole meeting. We ask to select those who will sacrifice and then handle our borehole for us. And then, those that will not feeling maybe lazy. They can say run and do this ... The borehole will spoil for some number of days and you're in borehole committee ... You may not know ... It means that you cannot do the work. So we always sit and then ask to select those who can sacrifice and then handle because we don't pay them. It is a community voluntary work. So we call the meeting and then we ask with community members in the presence of the chief or any other maybe assembly member or leaders in the community to be able to select these people. And, if we select them, we'll let them know what they're supposed to do. And then if it happens that it's a new borehole like, World Vision or any other NGO that comes to give us the borehole they'll call those people and train them how to handle it. So our selection normally done During meetings.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. then does the use of those water facilities ... The boreholes, the Wells and then the dams ... Does it normally result in disagreements?
308 :	Yeah. Sometimes it comes, but it's not all that much. When it comes, it is maybe the contribution. Someone may intend not to pay for some number of years. If you mean to explain to this person and the person doesn't have patience he may tend to say something that is not even normal. So it has happening, but it is easy to resolve.
Shani Haruna:	So the contribution that you mentioned, how regular do you make a those contributions?
308 :	Yeah, it is .... It depends on the number of people using the borehole. Like if you have many houses, let me say if it is an example that 10 houses are using a particular borehole and they say pay yearly, they can decide to pay maybe five cedi yearly or 10 cedi yearly. But you those who are not many, if you also pay five cedi yearly or two cedi yearly, it means that if the borehole spoil, you will not get money to reach how to maintain the borehole. So determine the number of people fetching that borehole. So that they will levy you to pay. The amount that to be able to yearly. It is paid yearly
Shani Haruna:	So how has the brave project helped in improving the disagreements that you mentioned sometimes it comes in thewater use sources?
308 :	Yeah. The brave project helped in the sense that people ... On those payments people just understood that government have given to us ...., it has been given to us by district assembly. If it spoils, we go back to the DCE, or we call the assembly man to come. But due to their explanations and the learning processes that we've learned, if someone gives maybe shirt to you that that person will not follow every day giving you a soap or water to wash it. You need to also handle it, so that it'll help you. So due to those education and then community meetings that talk of ...., people now understand that if we don't contribute and it spoils ...., DCE is not drinking from this borehole, any other person of maybe the NGOs .... , The officials there they don't drink their water here. So it is we in the community that we'll continue suffering. So in that we need to contribute. So it is from the learning process that we got to know that when you give me something I need to take good care of it so that it'll help me. At the first time, people were ...., if you even give some maybe the borehole, they'll be calling that the borehole is spoilt ....., the dam .. You come and do this. They don't even contribute towards repairs. But due to the meetings and the explanations that we're getting from brave it has minimized and I believe nothing like those issues would come back.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	So in your opinion, what do you think needs to happen so that you can have more access to water?
308 :	Yeah. In my opinion, like the study that we are going on, most communities, some of them they are lacking ... Still lacking of water in communities. Some communities they have only maybe one borehole or two and then the the population is too high, plenty. So my intention ... Or what I'm thinking of is like the information always gathered by brave or any other people .... Those who come into any community, should send that information back to assembly and also remind them all the time. Maybe they won't forget about. Otherwise looking at it and then waiting till the time they want to come out with the politics. They can come and give here maybe three boreholes in which we're in need of only one. One will be okay for us. But the politicians will say carry away. They don't follow the right way of distributing boreholes. If this information are able to send back to them and they gather it, I know there will be changes so that we will not be having a problem with access to water. People are still somewhere and they don't have water. Those are even near the river go and then just dug some small portion and water will be coming out from the river so that they'll be fetching in which it won't end up to them nicely or they'll end up by sick. So if this information goes back and then they rectify it to come and support us.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So overall you have been a member of that group for a long time. How do you think the brave project has helped you to increase your income?
308 :	Yeah, yeah. It's helped me. At first when we were not having these techniques others team came with VSLA boxes and some were not eager to join. But due to this education we have children going to school. Their dresses, their Health, their consumption and then any other maintenance in the house. So brave made me to understand that after harvesting, sit down with your wife or the family to decide maybe something ... Make a budget, .... Let us divide this quantity, keep it aside, when we finish consuming this one, we go in and then take some. Then again, let's keep this one aside for our wards' education. Then in case we ..., sickness is an emergency thing, it can come at time. You also keep some aside so that in case maybe anytime, maybe let me say anytime at all wind can come and then blow your house away or it can rain and your house falls, where are you getting that help. No one will come from somewhere and then support you roof it back or rebuild. So you also look at the maintenance side and keep it. At the end, if you finish consumption or if you are not able to finish what you fetch for consumption, you add it and then sell it, buy an animal and then keep it, start rearing. So I believe due to this education, I have adopted and then it helped me. Because after harvesting you won't just keep it, when your wife want to say I want to go to and grind flour ... Go and fetch. So you won't know how to manage it. But if you divide it, you'll be able to manage. This is finishing and what happens to this. So we can even substitute enough. If you planned for this and that one doesn't happen it help us. So planning ..... I know that I'm also one of those who are planning due to the education received from brave.
Shani Haruna:	So I think that's our last question. I would like to say a big thank you to you for your time and the knowledge that you have shared with us.
308 :	Yeah. I also thank you for your time too. And then the delayance we have from the explanation on how community development is. So on behalf of the entire community, I'm warmly greeting you. Then say God bless you and then we have another conversation this time which will support as bring development in their community. Thank you.
