Shani Haruna:	This interview is with Mahammudu Bugri, Anon number 002.
Translator:	I'm Sahadatu Mahama, I'm the translator from 405 to Mr. Shani.
Shani Haruna:	Okay, so we'll like you to state your full name and your date of birth?
Translator:	My name is 405 and I'm 39 years old.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And are you male or female?
Translator:	Male.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And, do you hold any community position?
Translator:	Yes, I have they are about two.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. What are they?
Translator:	I have ... I am NDC delegates chairperson and I am unit committee memberand section leader, which is Zisung raana and yapaala.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So now we'll like him .... We would like you to explain what your understanding of the brave project is?
Translator:	I know .... My understanding of the project is, it have benefits on my .... It have benefits in farming activities like ploughing side, weeding side, fertilizer applications side and rearing of ruminants site.
Shani Haruna:	And what did you learn about water?
Translator:	I've learned about water, which is ploughing across the slopes in my farm.
Shani Haruna:	And what did you learn about boreholes and wells and then hand-dug wells?
Translator:	I didn't ... I don't have knowledge about water this thing .... The training of water management .... You say water. No, I didn't learn anything about wells and boreholes.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So, we're now coming to talk about access to weather information and then use. So how did you find out information about the weather last season?
Translator:	I've been hearing weather information from community people. They'll just say .... I'll just hear someone saying that the radio says .... I heard from the radio saying .... That they are saying that today it will be raining, and the rain will not enough for us ..... Will not be enough for us. That's what I was hearing.
Shani Haruna:	And apart from the people and the radio, where else did you hear weather information from?
Translator:	Only that. I have not ... I didn't hear anything anywhere again, but 2019 ....
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So you mentioned about hearing the information on radio, the wireless set to that you used to listen, who owns the wireless set and who uses? Is it the man or the woman?
Translator:	For the 2018 he was hearing from people who heard it from radio, but he himself didn't hear it from the radio station.
Shani Haruna:	So apart from the people that he heard it from, which other source did he get the weather information?
Translator:	No, I didn't hear from any station again, apart from the people who heard from the radio stations.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Then how did you find out information about the weather last season, the season that just ended 2019?
Speaker 2:	In 2019 I heard it from farmer and water project in which gmet people came, who is Mr Nana Kofi who came and said it in our group. That's where I heard it.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. what did you hear about the weather in 2019?
Translator:	I heard that there will be above rainfall with Lightining and thunder. That is what I heard from him.
Shani Haruna:	And, did the information meet what you were expecting?
Translator:	Yes. It meets what I was expecting.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And when you heard the information about the weather, how did you use that information?
Translator:	Yes, I used it by using my farm land, which has been .... If there is below rainfall it will not get water .... That place water will not be there. But if there will be above rainfall, there will be water there. So I've used it to cultivate maize .... Early matured maize and rice at the same time. So I've had the maize after the water comes and I've had the rice too. That's what I used it, the information.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. when did you plant the maize?
Translator:	I sowed the maize on May 25th of 2019.
Shani Haruna:	And when did you harvest the maize?
Translator:	I harvested it on August 27th 2019.
Shani Haruna:	And when did you sow the rice and when did you harvest the rice?
Translator:	I sowed the rice on the 7th June, 2019 and harvest it in December. I did ... I can't remember the date in December.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Translator:	Because he had the information that the rain will be heavy this year, he sowed rice after harvesting the maize in August.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So what other changes did he make as a result of getting information ... The weather information?
Translator:	I've changed a lot because I've ... When I was having my farm land I used to be planting .... Sowing maize every year in one particular place because.... Since I've heard farmer and water group discussion, I used to do shifting cultivation this year. I've changed by using ... Crossing slope places. If I'm to plough I'll look at my slope. Where it's slope I'll cross the ploughing. I don't farm straight the this thing .... The sloping. I've changed in harvesting too. Previous time I used to harvest late, but since I've heard from farmer and water group discussion I've ... I'm now monitoring my crops and see when to .... And I now know when to harvest my things for good yield .... My crops for good yield. I've changed a lot by protecting my farm with Bush burn. I used to do farm belt in my farm to protect the fire entering in my farm.
Shani Haruna:	In the future, what do you think will be the best way for you to receive weather information?
Shani Haruna:	In future I would've prefer if brave project would've let gmet people have their office within our region or our district so that they would speak in radio stations. They would go in radio stations to give the information so that we will also hear the information from the radio stations.
Shani Haruna:	And apart from the radio station, which other source would you want to receive weather information from?
Translator:	If brave project is .... Will be still working I would have prefer hearing it from that place. But if not that I don't know where I can hear it again.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And do men have more phones than women in his opinion?
Translator:	Men have phones than women.
Shani Haruna:	Why do men have more phones than women?
Translator:	The reason why men have phones than women is men don't have enough with in the .... Work load is not on men in the house like women. Women have work load in the house, they cater for house activities, house consumption and everything like health in the house, children health in the house, women cater for that. But men are not. And if not the youth girls who have the phones too. And for the youth girls, they have boyfriends who come buy for them. That's why the youth girls have the phones. And the youth boys too, they use to good for kayayo and work for themselves. They have their own farms .... Farm land like acre, 2 acres in their father's farm. After working for the father, he will go there and work for himself. So he used to have money through that and he can buy the phone. That's why the youth too have phones. So youth plus the men have phones more than the women.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	And why .... So why are the women more responsible in the house than men?
Translator:	Women have responsible than men in the house because the men doesn't gives womans money for cooking. They don't give money for health responses unless the woman. And they are only give the woman land to farm for the what ... For whatever she wants. If the groundnuts or okro .... If she had it, she will use that one and cater for the house again. So that's why she can't use that one for the house responses and use it to buy phone again. If she buys phone it's useless. She can't even get credit to do what she wants to do.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Then how often do agric extension officers visit to give information about farming?
Translator:	Agric officers often come on March to give us agric informations on farming .... March.
Shani Haruna:	Do they .... Do the agric extension officers give you information about water management?
Translator:	Yes, they do. Sometimes they came ..... Sometime they came and asked of where we usually get our drinking water in the farms.
Shani Haruna:	And apart from the drinking water, what other information do they give about water management?
Translator:	We use to dig hand-dug wells in our farms and we manage it by using .... Protecting the fall of animals like cows. So we used to fence it for the safe of cows falling in and for .... To be clean for drinking in our farms.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And what information do the agric extension officers normally provide you about the weather?
Translator:	They ... I had the weather information from agric extension officers on improved seeds. They advice on improved .... For buying improved seeds for the season because there would be .... If there is low rainfall and you sowed long term variety it may not be fruit when the ..... It may not have yields when the rain stopped. But if you sowed the improve variety, early variety you may harvest it at the correct time when the rain stops.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Then how do you normally get access to the agric officers? The agric extension officers in the absence of the brave project.
Translator:	So far as farmer and water project have come with agric extension officers, we have relationship with each other. So if they are not more coming and I want the information in weather I can just go to mofa office and asked for the weather information.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And then what crops do you normally grow?
Translator:	I have .... I plant .... I sowed maize .... I cultivate maize, rice, groundnuts, soya beans, millet and cow pea.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And for last season and this season, where did you find information about the crops that you mentioned?
Translator:	I've been hearing the information about my varieties of seeds ....early varieties from farmer and water project discussion and from my group members. I have a group in which we discuss farming activities and that too. So we discuss it there and I've heard the new variety and some were having the early matured rice seeds there. So I used to send mine to them and change theirs to go and sow in my farm. That is where I had the information.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	And in the future, what do you think would be the best way for you to hear information about your ... The crops that you mentioned?
Translator:	In future I will have the information from MoFA Agric extension officers in their office. I can go there for the information, or I will contact them in my phone to see whether .... To seek for the information.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. The informations you have been hearing on the radio, what changes did you do in your livestock rearing with that information?
Translator:	I've changed by having husbandry for my small ruminants. Unlike previous, I was just ... They were just outside roaming. Whether I have them or not I'll look for them when I'm in need of them. But now I have their the husbandary for them in the house.
Shani Haruna:	Apart from the housing, what other changes have you made in your livestock rearing?
Translator:	In case of the health of the animal, I used to call veterinary officer to come and look at the animal for me for the health of it.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. then how do you make the animal houses?
Translator:	I'll put holes around the this thing .... The building, so that it will have ventilation in the room for the animals.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So how did you find the well monitoring training that you received?
Translator:	No, I was .... I didn't take part of the training.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And do you think men and women have access to different information?
Translator:	Both men and women have the same information.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And do men get more information about water than women?
Translator:	Women have more information .... Water information more than men because the women are using water more, they are fetching water more than the men and they used to be in water sources than men. If any information in water sources at all .... Both either well, at borehole, at the stream, women will have the information before the men. That's why women are having water information than men.
Shani Haruna:	And does that affect the relationship between men and women?
Speaker 2:	No, it won't affect the relationship.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. We're now about to talk about water use, management and disagreements? What do you normally use water for?
Speaker 2:	We use water for building, washing our face early in the morning, cooking, bathing, building, plastering, drinking and flooring of our houses.
Shani Haruna:	So for all the activities that you mentioned, how do you plan your water use such thatyou are able to get water to use for all the activities that you mentioned?
Translator:	I'll plan by selling my farm product, which I will use for a donkey cart to give me water to build my this thing. I'm planning to build a house and I want to know how to get water to manage and get water at that time. I know I can't carry water for the building, but if I plan and get money I will get water to do that.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And how has the brave helped you to manage your water better?
Translator:	They've .... Farmer and water project help us to .... On water harvesting. So we use ..... They built our capacity on water harvesting. So we harvest water in our things to help us manage in doing what our activities.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	Do you have a group or a committee that is responsible for managing your boreholes or wells and dams?
Translator:	Yes, there are committee for boreholes and wells but not the dam. The dam doesn't have committee. Those who just dig the boreholes, some of them are responsible for that ... The wells. Yes.
Shani Haruna:	So how are the members selected?
Translator:	It was ... They were selected by the community, the community members.
Shani Haruna:	And what did they consider the before selecting those people?
Translator:	Because their contribution to the activities in the community, active contribution. Because of the active contribution in the community that they've selected them.
Shani Haruna:	In your opinion, what needs to happen to improve water the access and management in Jawani?
Translator:	I think that if .... In future, if we have community .... We would have conduct community contribution for the repairing of the boreholes, it would have been better for us to have access for water in future.
Shani Haruna:	Would you say, water usage, that's the boreholes and the wells, their use results in disagreements?
Translator:	Yes, disagreement was there previously, but now our days so far as we have so many wells in the this thing .... You go there and you won't get someone to carry you self. But now .... The previous time they will be there about 20 ro 10 women to fetch the water. They will say, I am the first person. Someone would say I'm the first person. But now they won't be there up to five people self. So there's no the disagreement again.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And finally how do you think the brave project has helped you increase your income and assets?
Translator:	It has help me by building my capacity on farming activities. Like previous, I used to farm a lot, but I'll loss. But now that I've had the discussion on .... The education on farming, I've now have good yield in my farm with my farm products, which helps me to do whatever I want. So that is what it has help me.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	So we'll like to say thank you and grateful to you for your time and the experiences that you have shared with us.
Translator:	I've also have greetings to all, like brave projects people like mr Shani, CARE People like Madam Gladys, mofa like mr Foster and all members in this group. I have my greetings going to you people. I thanks a lot for Mr. Shani as he used his time to Interview me today.
