This is a sample FAIR interview data and analysis presented for researchers who would like to upload their own FAIR interview data via ABCE Open Research Work. Please be aware that all documents are open resources obtained from British Geological Survey (BGS) in UK government website: https://data.gov.uk/dataset/0b747fe2-ce64-4234-8a90-cad3d47b4c0f/interview-data-to-assess-brave-project-impact-nerc-grant-ne-m008983-1, and only served as an example to guide the researchers about the correct format to create and upload their own data.Project brief description:This NERC granted research project is to assess BRAVE project impact through interview with target communities in Burkina and Ghana. This particular set of data includes 22 sets of impact interviews conducted with the target communities in Jawani and Tariganga, Ghana associated with the BRAVE project. All interviews are transcriptions in TXT file. Individuals were selected based on their participation in the BRAVE field activity of the Farmer Voice Radio. The data was collected between October 2019 and February 2020 by the local researchers. This data methodology was built on the initial vulnerability assessments, and include questions around behaviour change and income change based on the BRAVE communities’ activities of ground water measurement and water management strategies. This data shows behaviour and livelihood change within the communities and due to these activities. This is final qualitative impacts dataset from the BRAVE project. Previous linked data sets include the baseline vulnerability assessments and the first round of impact interviews. BRAVE refers to Building understanding of climate variability into planning of groundwater supplies from low storage aquifers in Africa and is a ‘Consortium’ research project is part of the UPGro (Unlocking the Potential of Groundwater for the Poor) programme.Things to consider for researcher when uploading FAIR data:- Video or audio interview data should be transcripted and uploaded in TXT format- Information relating to raw interview data, sometimes known as metadata, is necessary for a FAIR practice and it is recommended to present metadata in JSON format - Interview questions should be provided separately with transcript for clearer presentation, preferably in TXT format- Example analysis could be included for readers
This folder contains following documents, which are examples demonstrating the recommended format and process of creating and uploading FAIR interview data for researchers:1. BRAVE Project_Read-me.txt	A read-me.txt document showing basic information of this folder2. Original folder from government	Unprocessed data obtained from government open resources link for reference (https://data.gov.uk/dataset/0b747fe2-ce64-4234-8a90-cad3d47b4c0f/interview-data-to-assess-brave-project-impact-nerc-grant-ne-m008983-1)
3. Transcript OP folder	Folder containing 22 set of individual transcript in TXT file and 1 combined transcript that naturally generated through the python code for analysis
4. BRAVE Project_Interview Metadata Additionals_v2. JSON	A JSON file with datatype information (eg. String/Integer) and description explaining terminology used in metadata dataset5. BRAVE Project_Interview Metadata Dataset v2.csv	A metadata CSV file with information of interview data (eg. Interview date, location and duration)6. BRAVE Project_Interview questions.txt	A TXT document with 34 interview question for Ghana study7. OpenResearch_Interview_Analysis_v2.ipynb	Python code for transcript analysis. The script provide functions to search, pinpoint and count the occurence of specific word in individual and combined transcripts. 	Please note that this code demonstrates one way of simple analysis, it is recommended that detailed analysis such as SPSS, thematic analysis, although not included in this specific example, should be conducted as according to your research aim and objectives.    