BRAVE project Ghana interviews questions                             


1. Please state your full name?

2. Please state your date of birth?

3. Please state if you are male or female?
Notes: (do we want to ask more men?/get additional interviews for other people outside the LGs?) 

4. Do you hold any community positions? If so, what are they?

5. Please explain what your understanding of the BRAVE project is? 

6. How did you find out information about the weather last season? 
Notes: (for Qs 5 – 10 you need to dig deeper for example, If they identify a radio/phone ask who owns its, who uses it the most? If they identify the agric. officer ask how do they find this person – do they phone them or visit them? Ask about other information sources such as other farmers, social gatherings ect.) 

7. How did you find out information about the weather this season?

8. What changes did you make because of this information?

9. In the future, what would be the best way for you to receive this information? If men listen to the radio more than women, and if so why do women still want the radio? Is there a better wat they can get information?  

10. Do men have phones more than women? Why? 

11. Does the Agric. Ext. officer provide information about water management and weather? Would they like to get this information from this source? How do they access the Agric. Ext. officers when BRAVE is not there?

12. How did you find out information about your crops last season? Eg. If they got a disease 

13. How did you find out information about your crops this season? Eg. If they got a disease 

14. In the future, what would be the best way for you to receive this information?

15. Did you make any changes to your farming or livestock activities as a result of the information you heard on the radio?

16. How did you find the well monitoring training you received?

17. How have you used the well monitoring training to make changes to water use this season? Examples
 
18. How will you use this to make changes in the future? Examples

19. What would you like more information on? 

20. Do you think men and women have access to different information? How? Why is this the case? 

21. Do men and women get different information about different things? Do men get more information about water than women? Does this affect relationships between men and women?

22. What has allowed you to plan your water usage better?

23. How have you changed how you use your water because of this? 

24. How has the BRAVE project helped the wider community to manage water better? Are there any committee organisations? Tell me about them – who is involved, what do they do, how do they get chosen? 

25. Would you like the local district council to help water management and use? How?

26. Have these changes helped you to increase your income and assets? How? 

27. How has the BRAVE project helped your community? 

28. Would you say that water usage causes disagreements? Examples

29. If not, what are the main causes for disagreement in your community?

30. How has the BRAVE project improved these disagreements? Examples

31. Would you like to and be able to invest in digging your own well? Why? What would you use it for? 

32. Have water use decision making processes changed since BRAVE has been in place? How? 

33. Has anything else changed since the BRAVE project started? What?

34. What needs to happen to improve water access and management in your opinion? Especially after BRAVE finishes? What must happen to make sure you continue to get support/information? 
