Shani Haruna:	This is interview with 301, annon number 003.
Translator:	to do the translation on behalf of 301 I am Atirago Kate Atipoaka.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So, we'll like to know your full name, your date of birth and whether you are male or female.
Translator:	My name is 301. My date of birth is April, 1964. I am a male.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. do you hold any position here?
Translator:	Yes. I hold a position. I'm the chairman for the community VSLA.
Shani Haruna:	okay. So now we'll like to know, what is your understanding of the brave project? What do you know about that brave project?
Translator:	I have learnt about new methods of farming and livestock rearing and I've learned that when I acquire the knowledge from this project I will also use it to educate my colleagues who have not gotten the knowledge.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So, apart from the farming, what other things did they speak about in the project?
Translator:	I've learned to always comport myself. I tolerate people. I will not just see someone and start disrespecting or insulting the person.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And then what did they... What information did they give to you about water in the brave project?
Translator:	What I've learned about water is that if you're having a farm that is not...[recorder memory gets full and I had to turn it off and transfer some of the audio files to my laptop to create more space]
Shani Haruna:	This is a continuation of the interview with 301.
Shani Haruna:	So what information did you hear about water in the project?
Translator:	The information I heard from this project about water was that if you are having a land that is not flat, and it is sloping then what you need to do is, you should know how to plough. When you are ploughing, you make sure that you plough across in a way that when it rains, water will not just slope down or go freely whereby your farm will be dry. You can also do bonding across the sloping side so that it will absorb water and you have moisture all the time.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So what did they.... What information did they give you about boreholes and then wells?
Translator:	Yeah, through the project we had information on boreholes and wells. They have ever given us a mechanized borehole. The one which is using manpower. But later on we had the pipes that we are using through this project.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So, we're now going to talk about access to weather information and how they use it. Okay. So we would like to know, how did he find out information about the weather last season?
Translator:	Last season, the information I heard was that that particular year we will not have enough rains like the previous year, so we should plant early so that it may not affect our crops.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. When did.... Where did you get that information? What was the source of that information?
Translator:	The information was from agric extension officers. They came here that time to brief us on the weather or educate us on the weather and the practices that we should adopt.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Apart from the extension officers, which other source did you get information about the weather from?
Translator:	The politicians sometimes organize rally and talk to us on how we should be serious with our farming. And sometime district assemblies too will organize programs and tell us that we should take our farming activities seriously. So through those meetings too we get knowledge on the weather.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So how did you find out information about the weather this season?
Translator:	The information I heard this season about the weather was that in the 11th month that's November, we will not have rains again. So we were told on what kind of crops and varieties that we should plant.
Shani Haruna:	So what varieties were you advised to sow?
Translator:	We were asked to plant maize, cowpea, soybeans earlier. But unfortunately, me for instance, I didn't listen. So due to that when I planted, I didn't cultivate well.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. why did they advise you to sow those varieties?
Translator:	We were told that those crops will do well unlike the millet. The millet needs rains for long time. So because the rains will not be there for long, we were asked to go in for those varieties.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So are you able to mention some of the varieties that you sowed?
Translator:	For the varieties I can't tell.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So you mentioned you heard a lot about the weather information. Where did that information come from?
Translator:	I was hearing the information from Quality radio at Garu.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Then who were giving that information on that radio station?
Translator:	For this I can't tell.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So the information that you heard about the weather, what changes did you use that information to do in your farming activities?
Translator:	There wasn't any change in myself though, but my colleagues who followed the advice from the experts were able to have good yield. But because I didn't listen or I didn't start planting the time that we were advised to plant mine didn't do well.
Shani Haruna:	So we'll like you to share your experience with us about your friends; what they heard and then what they did as a result of the information and what the results is for them.
Translator:	I'm sure it's just the advice that was given on air that my colleague or my friend was able to follow it well. That yielded the good yields for him.
Speaker 2:	Okay. then why didn't also use that information that you heard on the radio?
Translator:	I think mine was just ignorance. I didn't believe or I didn't trust that information and that was why it led me to that.
Speaker 1:	Okay. Then why didn't you belief in that information?
Translator:	I'm someone who doesn't sit at one particular place. Though I had the intention to follow those procedure but going up and down, by the time I realized the dates or the time we were advised to plant exceeded.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So in the future, what would be the best way for him to receive information about the weather?
Translator:	In future, if I should hear this information or information about the weather on radio, it will help. If I should hear it this time I don't think I'll repeat the mistake I did.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And then do you think men listen to radio more than women here?
Translator:	I think men listen to radio more than women because almost every man has a radio set. And in the evening, for instance, when you are back from your farm to the house, what you need to do is just to bath and open your radio set and listen to what is happening.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So why are women not having radio sets or have lesser radio sets than men?
Translator:	Some of the women cannot afford and those who can afford, sometimes their children will even seize it from them to be using to listen whatever they want and just forget of their mothers. So that is the reason why men have radio set than women.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Then, apart from the radio sets, is there any other better way that they can get weather information besides the radio?
Translator:	Apart from radio, I don't think there will be any other source.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. so men and women here, who have more phones than the other and why?
Translator:	I think men have phones more than women because men have privilege than women. Even if the person is even a boy, he can do his own things that no one can maybe say anything but women there are some things that are limited to them.
Shani Haruna:	So, what are the things that are limited to the women?
Translator:	Most of the women cannot afford due to poverty. The few who have access are those who have children maybe down south who always maybe get them some, but the poverty rate is high for most of them to afford phones.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. No. Okay. then how often do agric extension officers visit to give them advice on their farming activities?
Translator:	Yes, they do come, especially during the dry season like this or dry season farming. They come to our houses to check on our livestock. If it is a during raining season before the rains even set in, they will also come and talk to us before they start talking on radio for us to be hearing of whatever they have for us.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So when they visit, what information do they give them about water management?
Translator:	Their advise on water management is just what I said earlier because they make sure, we those who our lands are not flat but the sloping type, they'll be advising us on how to plough, how to do bonding so that the water wouldn't be flowing all the time.
Shani Haruna:	What about the dam water? Do they give you advice on how to manage it?
Translator:	I haven't gotten any information from the extension officers on maybe our dam rehabilitation or how to manage it, but the community people are the very people who normally take care of that. And I was even once a chairman for our community dam. But unfortunately, it got to some point that the chief involved himself and I have to just come out with that position because it was the community members who chose me and when it go to that aspect or where the chief involved himself I decided to quit from that position.
Shani Haruna:	So we're now going to talk about access to crop information and then use. So what crops do you grow?
Translator:	I plant millet, maize, soybeans, and cowpea. If it is the dry season too I always plant or nurse onions in my gardens.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So the crops you have mentioned, where did you find information about them last season?
Translator:	Those crops, I saw them from friends or relatives. So I also engage with them and had access to those varieties or those seeds to also plant.
Shani Haruna:	So for instance, if your crop had a disease, how did you know that it had a disease? Or how did you get information about the crops?
Translator:	Yeah. Normally, sometimes we witness some insects or some birds on our crops. But when it happens too, how we normally do is to go to PAS-G, that's the Garu Presby Agric Station and explain to them how maybe those insects are so that they will help us get chemicals for spraying.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So apart from the PAS-G, which other institution do you go to for information about your crops?
Translator:	Okay. You can also get maybe a variety or a good seeds for your farm through maybe moving with friends. In terms of conversation, you may have an information from a friend that this particular seed I have used it and it is very good and you can also maybe have it and try it and see how it actually goes.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So what would be the best way for him to receive such information in the future?
Translator:	In future I'll like to maybe be getting information like this from a program such as this brave project and maybe from friends. As I move with friends or I do visit people, I can also be getting information on crops from them.
Shani Haruna:	So the information is that you got on the crops, what changes did it help you to make in your farming activities?
Translator:	The changes I've made or the change I've made is, like those days I didn't consider the quantity of the fertilizer I'm having. I can plant number of hectors and I may not even get fertilizer a quarter or half of it and it will go waste, it won't do well. But for the information I've been hearing I plant according to how I think I can afford fertilizer and apply. So that's the changes I have made.
Shani Haruna:	Are there other changes apart from the fertilizer, that you have for made?
Translator:	I also made changes in my livestock because those days I was practicing extensive methods of a rearing but through the information I make sure I get time for my animals; how they will eat, where to sleep and whatever will make them comfortable.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. We're now coming to talk about well monitoring. Did you receive a training on well monitoring?
Translator:	I've not gotten any training from well monitoring.
Shani Haruna:	So we'll now talk about how men and women have access to information here. So in his opinion does he think that men and women have access to different information?
Translator:	I will say no because the community have community radio. So whatever information they have, it is always passed through that, that is on air. So everybody always hear what is happening.
Shani Haruna:	And do you also think that men get more information about water than women?
Translator:	I don't believe this. It is the other way round. I think a woman get water information first because it is women who go to fetch water. And if there's any information about water, whoever is coming to give them water, it's always the women that they will even brief them or sit with them before it comes out.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So does that affect the relationship between men and women here?
Translator:	I don't think it spoils any relationship or bring misunderstanding because it is the woman who does the fetching. So I don't see why maybe they'll get the information maybe first and it will lead to maybe disagreement. I for instance I don't even go to the borehole that is closer me but I bath every day. So now that it's the woman who does the fetching there's no any problem.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. you also mentioned something about a community radio station or information center. What kind of information do they normally give out?
Translator:	This community radio or information center, the kind of information that we hear or share it here is the information that always comes from agric station or if it is this discussion that we normally air it on GBC I think the one who is taking care of it or the presenter here will do the recording and always have a particular time that he plays it on air here for the whole community to listen.
Shani Haruna:	That's good.
Shani Haruna:	So we're now coming to talk about water management, use and disagreements. What has allowed him to be able to plan his water use better?
Translator:	The information I've heard about water management or usage is that, we are told or taught how to use good water or quality water. Those days, we didn't care the kind of water to drink. Especially when you are thirsty, you can just see underground water or maybe a river water or whatever and you would drink from it. But due to this information we have been hearing and the boreholes that we have forgotten there's quality water for us to always drink.
Shani Haruna:	So how has the brave project helped you to manage your water better?
Translator:	What I've learned from this project on water management is that previously we didn't know when you are to fetch water you should make sure your containers are neatly washed. But for now through the project or the program, normally we make sure we wash our containers. Even, if it is the local pot make sure you wash it and cover. Don't let mosquitoes or insects to always be in the water and you'll be drinking it like that.
Shani Haruna:	So the water facilities that they have here, are there groups that are responsible for managing them?
Translator:	Yes. We have groups who take care of these boreholes, wells and dams. And it is we the community members who have sat down to choose these people.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. what do you call those.... Those groups that are managing the water facilities, what do they call them?
Translator:	We don't have names. We only... What we only do is that this group is for this particular borehole, this group is for the dam and this group is for a well but we don't have names given to the groups.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So those that they choose to manage the water facilities, how do they choose them? What do they consider before they choose those people?
Translator:	The only qualities or procedure we follow is we make sure the person will admit that she or he will agree to do the work. And normally what we do is that we don't always choose them from one particular let's say clan or this thing. We make sure that they will come from different places especially if it's a dam.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. thenwould you say the usage of the boreholes and dams result in disagreements?
Translator:	It doesn't bring any disagreement between those who are using it. Why we choose the leaders is that any time there's maybe the borehole or there's a fault, they're the very people who will lead them maybe to those in charge for them to maybe have information and come and see how they will solve it for them.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. then, what needs to happen to improve water access here?
Translator:	What need to be done is that the leaders we have chosen, they would be the very people to determine whether we need access to water or not. If they look at it in a way that we still need more boreholes, they will sit with us and maybe propose and then if it is yes, they will then maybe go to opinion leaders or maybe go to those who are responsible maybe in helping that and maybe cry on them or to them for them to get help.
Shani Haruna:	Sowho will they go to and ask for that help?
Translator:	I think those people that they will be going to first it maybe the assembly man for the area. And then from then either to the DCE or the MP.
Shani Haruna:	Now how has the brave helped you to increase your income?
Translator:	I didn't know managements or how to manage anytime my money enters into my hands, but through the advice or the education I'm getting from brave, anytime I get money now or when I get some money, I know how to manage. I know that maybe I'll be using it for a very important thing. I will not just spend it any how on, excuse me to say, unnecessary things.
Shani Haruna:	We will like to say thank you for the time that you had with us and for sharing your experiences with us.
Translator:	I appreciate. I also thank you for the knowledge I've also acquired from you. It will help me in my activities.
