Shani Haruna:	This interview is with Alem Lucy annon number 004. So we'll like you to state your full name.
302:	My name is 302
Shani Haruna:	And what's your date of birth?
302:	I'm born in 2nd February, 1974
Shani Haruna:	And are you male or female?
302:	I am female.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. do you hold any community position?
302:	Yes. I'm community monitor.
Shani Haruna:	Apart from that do you hold any other position?
302:	No.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	Now we would like you to explain what your understanding of the brave project is. So what is your understanding of that brave project?
302:	Brave is here for about a year now and they're with us helping us to understand more about farm work and then they also ..., we also used to meet and discuss about how we can come together and do well to care for how the climate is now changing to protect our environment.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Then what did you learn about the water under the brave project?
302:	We learn about water because like ... During harvesting of water, like if the water, the rain falls during the rainy season, we will do well to look some things which will contain the water for us to use it during the time there will be no rain.
Shani Haruna:	And what did you learn about groundwater? The water that comes into your boreholes and then the wells that you fetch for your activities.
302:	Okay. We have got boreholes here and some is from World Vision and then we're even having a some boreholes before, wells too. The wells, there are not more water there again. We're now using the boreholes. And even recently we had mechanised borehole again.
Shani Haruna:	So, we're now about to talk about access to weather information and how the information is being used. So how did you find out about the weather last season?
302:	Yes. For the weather we always .... We used to hear information from, eh, eh, weather forecast people. Like sometimes we use to hear information from our phones, sometimes too in radios. That always help us to know how the rain fall pattern will come.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. you said you sometimes get the messages on your phone. Who sends you those messages?
302:	Sometimes it always from ... Is it PAS-G, or I could not remember all but sometimes it used to come from a PAS-G.
Shani Haruna:	Then you also mentioned you sometimes hear it on the radio. Which radio station do you normally hear it from?
302:	Sometime they will come to Quality FM.
Shani Haruna:	Who comes there?
302:	Sometimes, it's Albert. Yes. The mofa officers, they always come to tell us the information in radios.
Shani Haruna:	So apart from the radio, which other places do you get information about the weather from?
302:	Apart from the radio, Like meetings ... Sometimes like the way you people came, they brave program came. They always ... Sometimes they used to bring some specialized person there to come and talk to us.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Okay.
Shani Haruna:	You mentioned you sometimes listen to the radio to get information about the weather. Who owns the radio sets that you listen to?
302:	Doctor Sana.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. what I mean is the radio set. The wireless set. Who owns it? The one that you listen to who is the owner?
302:	My husband
Shani Haruna:	And who uses it most?
302:	He will always use it. Whenever it's news time, he will bring it out and we all listen.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So the agric officers that you mentioned you hear on radio, apart from you hearing them on radio, are you able to get access to them?
302:	Yes. If I want to know something more and contact them, they will tell us.
Shani Haruna:	How do you contact them?
302:	I always go to the office.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. then the season that just ended, how did you find out about the weather? Where did you hear information about the weather?
302:	That one, It always come through our phones. They will tell us that tomorrow, this time there will be rain. Sometimes it could happen. Sometimes too It may not happen, but it can fall somewhere Not all that far. We can hear from some people that rain falls here.
Shani Haruna:	So the weather information is that you received, what changes did you use that information to make in your farming activities?
302:	Yes, for this one it helped us a lot. Like if you are preparing to apply your fertilizer and you know very well that they already said that this time there will be rain, you will not go and apply. You wait until after the rain, you can then apply. And even sometimes when your farm land is far and you want to go and you heard of this information, you will not go. You will wait until or after the rain. You know the time the rain will fall
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So apart from the application of fertilizer and then going to the farm, did you make any changes to the time that you sow your seeds?
302:	Yes.
Shani Haruna:	What did you make to that?
302:	Because they tell us the time the rain will start and the time the rain will end we know the inputs .... Which the early maturing ones, you know that if you sow this time, by this time you can harvest. And so for that one we will not sow the late ones again.
Shani Haruna:	So which varieties did you sow?
302:	The early maturing ones.
Shani Haruna:	How long do they take before they mature?
302:	Sometimes some are three months and some are four months.
Shani Haruna:	What crops?
302:	Maize and then sorghum. But for the rice too, they are also got some which also ...., if you sow that one three months too, you also harvest and some will be about five.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. did you also make changes to when you start sowing? The time that you plant and what changes did you make to the time that you start sowing?
302:	That one Depends on the rainfall pattern. Like if we get the rains fall in time, we also sow in time, but if the rain didn't fall in time, we also sow late.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. so before you heard the weather information which month were you planning to sow your crops?
302:	Like the last year?
Shani Haruna:	Yes. For last year.
302:	We were planning to sow June, May rather. Because of the rain fall some and even not because of only that one, you know, for women like this if the men haven't finished their this thing ...we women have no access to get ... How do you call it? ... The bullocks for them to plough ours so that we will Sow. So they always sow early and we sow later.
Shani Haruna:	So You had planned to sow in May? Then when you heard the information about the weather, which month did you sow?
302:	I sowed July and it was even getting to the ending self.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
302:	June rather, sorry. I sowed June, not July. June.
Shani Haruna:	So what did you hear in the weather information that made you to sow in June rather than May?
302:	Ike, they tell us this time the rain will be fall heavily. This time it will not fall heavy. We heard all those things. This time there will be rain and this time there will be no rain.
Shani Haruna:	So when did you hear the weather information? Which month did you hear it?
302:	Even it was April going or was it May. It seems it started April going.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So for the weather information, what do you think would be the best way for you to receive the weather information in the future?
302:	It's ..., To me it seems the phones is also better. And sometimes too ... Okay. To me, but sometimes too, like some people too they cannot read on phones. So if they also announce it in air, it's also better.
Shani Haruna:	When you to say on air. What do you mean on air?
302:	Like radio stations.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. do you think ... The men and women here, who do you think listen to radio more than the other?
302:	The men listen more than women.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And why do men listen more than women?
302:	Sometimes the time they will give the news maybe by that time women will be still busy.
Shani Haruna:	So, is there a better way that the weather information can be sent so that everybody can have access to it apart from the radio?
302:	Like the phones. If they always come and meet us and talk to us. So that one too, after the meeting, everybody they'll spread it out.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. so do think men have more phones than women here in the community?
302:	Man, having ... No, I don't think that men has more. Okay, for the phones, only that the phones has got difference. The men may have those phones which may take more information than women. Women can ..., they have phones, but they don't have the big phones. Or how am I going to put it? The smart smartphones.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So why are the women not having smart phones?
302:	That one is costly. We ..., It's not easy for us to afford that money.
Shani Haruna:	Then, the agric extension officers. How often do they come here to give information on farming?
302:	In a year time?
Shani Haruna:	Yeah, within a year. How regular do they come? Do they come every month, every week or every two months, or every six months?
302:	Like dry season like this they don't come regularly. But getting to raining season they'll visit us regularly.
Shani Haruna:	So during the raining season how regular do they visit?
302:	Like when it getting to time for us to sow, they will come and advice us how you do the this thing ... And that one I could say once a month or is it twice a month.
Shani Haruna:	And when they come, what information do they provide to you about water management?
302:	They always advise us to take good care of our waters which will help us to do our farming.
Shani Haruna:	So what crops do you grow?
302:	Maize, guinea corn, rice millet.
Shani Haruna:	So the crops that you just mentioned, how did you find out information about them last season?
302:	Information like what?
Shani Haruna:	Like how to plant them. The varieties that you should plant.
302:	It's from mofa people. The mofa officers.
Shani Haruna:	And what did they tell you about the crops?
302:	They tell us the varieties, like this variety will take about this months ... The number of months before it will mature and this variety will also take the number of this months before it will be matured for harvest.
Shani Haruna:	What did they tell you about water requirements of the crops?
302:	No, they didn't tell us.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So for this season, the one that just ended, how did you find out information about your crops?
302:	From agric officers.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And in the future, what do you think is the best way for you to receive such information?
302:	Like if they also ..., they call us for the meeting, like the NGO like this, they also ..., if they also call us for the meeting, that one will also help us.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	So what changes did you make to your farming activities or livestock activities as a result of the information that you heard on the radio?
302:	It helped us a lot because through there we are able to know how we will feed our livestocks. And then we also spread ..., like if we also hear, we also go and inform our neighbors too and they also had the information. We will also ..., they will use it to practice and it'll also help them.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. How did you find it the well monitoring training that you received? Well monitoring. Well monitoring training.
302:	I was not part with them, so because of that I can't best have much about that one information.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And do you think men and women have access to different information?
302:	Like?
Shani Haruna:	Like here, Do men have access to information that women don't have access to?
302:	Okay. Some ..., you know, we ... Like even if they call for meeting, they will call everybody and some meetings they will call only men to have that meeting, but not always.
Shani Haruna:	So what kind of meeting will they call only men?
302:	Okay. Like I can't best .... Like sometimes they will call only the men for that meeting. Like if they want to do something in the community, they will call the men to come and listen for that meeting, before they also spread ..., come back and spread to we the women and we all do it.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So why do they call men first before they come and spread the information to women later?
302:	Okay. Maybe sometimes it's not that meeting may be not part of us. Maybe that meeting will be only the men, but like if it is community meeting, all of us are involved.
Shani Haruna:	And do you think men get more information about water than women?
302:	No. Women. Information Like if there is no water or how? Yes, women felt that one first because we are the people who always go for water.
Shani Haruna:	And does that affect the relationship between men and women?
302:	No, it's not affecting us.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	So we're now going to talk about water use, management and disagreements. So normally, what do you use water for?
302:	We use it for our daily use.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	What exact ... What activities do you use it for?
302:	We use it for cooking, Washing, drinking and washing .... I've already said washing.
Shani Haruna:	Do you use it for farming too?
302:	I like the dams water we use that one for gardens.
Shani Haruna:	So, the activities that you've mentioned, how are you able to plan your water use around those activities?
302:	Like the waters, they have got some .. They selected some people and they're executive. They are taking care of the water. Like the boreholes they have got executive for the boreholes and even the dams too they've got executive who are also taking care of.
Shani Haruna:	So how has the brave project helped you to manage your water better?
302:	Brave program came and taught us how to save water, like rain water. But at first we were not aware that if we safe rain water we can still use that one for dry season. We learn how to ..... They taught us how to save that rain water for dry season work.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And what did you learn about how to manage your water on the farms?
302:	Water ...., like if your farm is running to one place and if rainfall, the water would run to one side. You .... You make bonding and sometimes you farm, ... You also make mulching too which will help you to ... Which will prevent the water destroying your farm products.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. would you say that water usage it results in disagreements? For instance, like the use of the boreholes and then the Wells. Do people always have the disagreements because of that or even the dam?
302:	No, for the ... For the boreholes. And they don't have any disagreement there. Only that the dams sometimes, they will open the water and some people it'll get to them and some people it may not yet get to them. Only that one is there.
Shani Haruna:	So such disagreements, how are they normally resolved?
302:	Oh, they always wait and they will still open it so that later on they'll get it. Like some will get it today and tomorrow they will also get it. If they don't close it, they will still get it.
Shani Haruna:	And at what intervals do they open that dam? How many days intervals?
302:	Three days. Three days.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So in your opinion, what needs to happen to improve water access and management here?
302:	Boreholes, we have no problem in it. Only that the dam water is not all that enough for us to do the farm, the dry season gardening.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	And so what do you think should be done to make the dam water enough for you to do your dry season farming?
302:	Like if the water too ... You know the boreholes, is still ... The boreholes is there, but as we saw the ... One of the mechanized one and that one too is only one here. And it's also not all of us get that water.
Shani Haruna:	So how has brave helped you to improve your income?
302:	Brave came and trained us. At first ... Like they taught us how to manage farm produce and then to do budgeting before we sell. And sometimes too during funerals We do spoil our foods. We prepare the food so much that people will come and they will not be able to finish it. And all those food we have to pour it away. Through their trainings we have now realized that we have to manage things.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So we'll like to thank you so much for your time and for the experiences that you have shared with us. We are so much grateful to you for your time.
302:	Welcome.
