Shani Haruna:	This is interview with 304. Annon number 006. So the first thing we would like to know about her, is to know her full name.
Translator:	I am Atirago Kate Atipoaka. On behalf of 304 I'm going to do the translation in Kusaal to English.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Translator:	Her name is 304.
Shani Haruna:	What is her date of birth?
Translator:	I can't tell my date of birth.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Then how old is she now?
Translator:	50 years of age.
Shani Haruna:	Is she male or female?
Translator:	She's a female.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And does she hold a position here in the community?
Translator:	I don't hold any position.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. The other thing we would like to know is to we would like to know what her understanding of the brave project is. What is her understanding of the brave project? Or what does she know about the brave project?
Translator:	I have learnt to know different varieties through the brave project and the proper way of taking care of my animals in rearing.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So what did you learn about water under the brave project?
Translator:	I've learned how to harvest water though, but my challenge is how to, how to get containers for the harvesting. I only have some pots or just some few containers that anytime it's raining I always store water in that and maybe later I can use it for household chores and maybe for my animals to be taking or drinking anytime there is shortage of water.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. The next part of our discussion is centered around access to weather information and how they use the information in their farming activities. So in this session the first thing we'd like to know is how did she find out information about the weather last season.
Translator:	I always get the information from the Gmet and sometimes listen to the brave project on GBC. I always get information there concerning the weather.
Shani Haruna:	You mentioned you get information from the gmet. How do they send the information to you
Translator:	We get the information from Gmet anytime we meet on the brave project. Sometimes they say they send messages to our phones, but unfortunately I don't have one. So I always hear the information from them on field or from the GBC radio station.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So apart from the Gmet you mentioned you also get information from the brave project. How do they bring how do you, how do they bring the information to you?
Translator:	Uh what she's saying is, eh, anytime the group always come with a Gmet official to the community, she always get the information there and the group too they have a leader. So normally when she receives a message or messages from gmet, anytime they always meet, he try, he tries to explain to them, eh, what he have gotten about the weather.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So apart from the gmet and then the brave project, does she have access to other sources where she can get weather information.
Translator:	Because I'm not an educated person it's always through the brave project, which is always in the local dialect that I get the information from, and any time the Gmet official comes and they explain to me, that's where I always get the information. Apart from that, I don't have any source that I get information from.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. are there farmer groups here farmer groups here where she is a member that she's able to get information about the weather from?
Translator:	Yeah. it's only the, the VSLA that I'm part where we do our weekly contribution towards our living.
Speaker 4:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	Then discussions we've had so far was about a last season. So we are now going to talk about this season, the farming season that just ended. How did she find out information about the weather?
Translator:	The information I normally get is not different from what I had on the previous years. We always get the information from the Gmet on the varieties that we should be using and how the season will go, whether it will rain normal, I will always hear whether the season it will rain normal, average or high. So it's through the radio station and what we always get from the group discussion. That's where I always get the information from.
Shani Haruna:	So what changes did you make as a result of you getting the weather information?
Translator:	The changes I've made is that when I wasn't hearing any information from radio or gmet, I used to have my own grains that I do sow or plant during rainy season. But for the information that have gotten or I've been getting, it helps me to know the variety to use because I will hear the information, how the duration of the season will be. And I've made a lot of changes, eh, due to that, because I can now harvest much, or I harvest much more than previously when I was not getting any information from the weather.
Shani Haruna:	Is she able to give us maybe an estimate of the yields that she made this year as compared to the other years?
Translator:	For instance, the rice I used to harvest I always get like two basins. But for the information i have gotten, on the same plots, eh, I have up to two bags. But for the maize I use not to be farming maize. It was the millets and those days, the men will not even allow you to even, eh, maybe grade it to know the quantity. But for the maize due to the information that we had I farm and I had about two bags, eh, two bags of the grains.
Shani Haruna:	So we are now going to talk about how best they will like to receive the weather information in the future. So in the future, what would be the best way for her to receive weather information?
Translator:	Apart from if the program continues for us to be getting the information on air and maybe coming here to brief us, I don't think I'll have any other alternative of getting information.
Shani Haruna:	And uh, does she think that men listen to radio more than women?
Translator:	To my opinion women listen to radio more than men.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So why is that so? Why do women listen to radio more than men?
Translator:	Women like learning new things. So for that matter they are always on their radio sets to listen to what is happening. But for the men, for instance, most of them don't have time to even sit by the radio sets to listen to what is going on.
Shani Haruna:	So, normally who owns the radio sets?
Translator:	Men used to own it all, but for now, eh, woman are having theirs and the men too are having theirs.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And that's nice. So apart from the radio, does she think there's another medium where they can send the weather information to her and she will be happy with it, or it will be more useful to her?
Translator:	It's only on the radio that I think I will be comfortable because I'm not educated. So I don't even have a phone. Besides that even if I have, and they give me a text message, I wouldn't be able to know what they are trying to say.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So are there other government agencies here in the districts where such information, they could pass it to her?
Translator:	Sometimes they always organize a meeting and call on the agric extension officers who comes to explain to us, eh, on the weather forecast about the season.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Who organises that meeting?
Translator:	Normally we have a community leader who always invite us that there will be a general meeting and we also have your community radio that they do announce on that anytime they want to meet us on such a discussion.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. that's fine. Does she think men have more phones than women in the community?
Translator:	I believe that men have phones more than women. Besides that they use quality phones because for her, apart from receiving a call she cannot use the phone for any other thing.
Shani Haruna:	So why do they have more phones and quality phones more than women?
Translator:	The reason being that most of the men have hand works than women. Though, some of the women too have those screen touch but they are just a few.
Shani Haruna:	So why are the men having more work than women?
Translator:	The reason is that most of the men are government workers. Some are teachers. Some have gotten the opportunity to join the fire service. Some have joined zoom lion. But for women I think it's just a few who have gotten the opportunity to those places. That's why I think they have more job than we the women.
Shani Haruna:	So, those men who have joined government offices, it appears maybe they are more educated in a way. So is it the case that the men are more educated than women?
Translator:	The men take their education seriously than women. For instance, a guy can even be in school, marry and go back to school, but the woman when you happen to give birth, the person will not agree to go back to the classroom. So the ladies or the women don't take their education serious as compared to the men.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And then, she mentioned something about the agric extension officer where she said sometimes the opinion leaders will organise a meeting and then invite the agric extension officers for the meeting. Sodo the extension officers give them .... At such meetings, do the extension officers give them information about water management?
Translator:	Apart from getting the water management from the brave project, the extension officers don't talk or teach us on how to manage water.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So what do they talk to you about at such meetings?
Translator:	Anyway, I said i have not been getting any information concerning the water management from the extension officers because it's not all the time that I've been attending the meeting. But those meetings that I've attended it's always on good farming practices that I've been taught and how to..... On good farming practices, about new varieties, when to plant, when to harvest so that I can get good yield.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Do they talk to them about the weather?
Translator:	What they normally ask us to be doing is when to plant the variety, how to use insecticides or good spraying methods. That's what they've been discussing much or telling us much to be doing.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So would they like to get weather information from the extension officers? Like if the extension officers were to bring them weather information would they be happy with it?
Translator:	I would have been happy if they were doing so.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So how do you access the agric extension officers when brave is not there?
Translator:	Had it not been because of this brave project for me, I wasn't hearing any information from them. I don't know if I even need something or if I need any information or if I want to know something concerning my farming or my rearing I don't know anybody to go to. So I'm always there.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So, we are now coming to discuss about access to crop information and then how they use the information. So first we would like to know how did she find out information about her crops last season? For instance, if the crops were not doing well or had a disease. How did she find out?
Translator:	For me, where I normally get my information concerning my crops is just from this brave project. Apart from this, I use not to get any information anywhere.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. You mentioned about extension workers. Did they come to give you information about your crops? Or what did they discuss with you?
Translator:	For the extension officers, they always come and give us the information before we even start planting. Any way, if they have been saying sometimes I can't tell because it's not all the meetings that I have been attending.
Shani Haruna:	So how often do the extension officers visit?
Translator:	For last year, they didn't call for any meeting apart from the brave project that I normally attend to maybe get an information there. Though there's one agric worker too who has been discussing something of that nature on radio stations.... One radio station in town here and sometimes when I open I get an information from it.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And which radio station is that? Is she able to mention the name of the radio station?
Translator:	Okay. I get the information sometime from Quality and eh, GBC URA radio. But GBC sometimes I struggle to get that one because I don't know numbers to look at the frequency to tune in to get that this thing.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So how did she find out information about her crops this season?
Translator:	I had the information from the brave project on how to do composting, how to apply fertilizer, how to use organic fertilizer and a lot. So it's on the brave project that I've been getting the information.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Now in the future, what would be the best way for her to receive such information?
Translator:	I think if I have a radio set and always listen to radio concerning the farming information, that's where I think it will help me. So if I continue having a radio, I think it would be the best way of helping me get information concerning agric.
Shani Haruna:	Then apart from the radio, which other source would you be happy to get the information from?
Translator:	Assuming we get experts talking to us all the time or coming to the community to be meeting us especially like what we are doing for the brief project for now. If he should explain to me the good practice and I accept it or I follow it, I think is something that will help me.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So did you make any changes to your farming or livestock activities as a result of the information that you heard on that radio?
Translator:	I've learned a lot concerning the information I've been getting. I learned a lot on post-harvest management, good storage practice even how to get markets for my produce any time I want to sell. On the aspect of the animals I think I always do hay and silage that's, I've been using it to feed them most of the time, especially during the time that there will not be grass for them to graze on it. I also store water in the way that I've been using it to give it to them. So normally it helps them anytime they are tasty or hungry, when they even go out they will be back to the house back to the house for proper management.
Shani Haruna:	So with farming we would like you to give us some examples of the changes that you made on your farm.
Translator:	For the rice for instance, what I normally do is anytime I realize that it's ready for harvesting, I do that earlier. I don't wait for it to dry on the farm before I pick them to the house. I harvest it early, go and dry it at home. When it is dry, I thresh it and then get a proper bag and store it. When it is well dried, that's what I do. I store it in proper bags and keep them.
Shani Haruna:	So we are now coming to talk about well monitoring. The project organised a well monitoring training. So how did you find that well monitoring training that you received?
Translator:	I wasn't part of any training concerning the well monitoring, so I don't have any information on that.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So we are now going to talk about gender and then access to general information here in Tariganga. Do you think men and women have access to different information?
Translator:	For me, I can't tell because I don't know what my colleagues listen to, the kind of information they listen to.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So assuming that somebody is bringing some new information herewho do you think will have access to that information first?
Translator:	I think we women always get the information or we women will get the information first.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So why do women get the information first before men?
Translator:	Unlike men women like sitting in groups like three or four. So anytime an information comes, I think we women always get it first. Besides that, even if I should hear, I like sharing or women like sharing information. So that's why I said, I think women will be the first people to hear any time there's an information.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So what kind of information do women get before men?
Translator:	Assuming if it is an NGO or maybe an organization or maybe an association coming to maybe meet the community members, for this one I think is the women who will hear the information first.
Shani Haruna:	So why is that so?
Translator:	Women like discussing or conversation.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Then that's fine. Do men get more information about water than women?
Translator:	Though for the water aspect the men always have the information first but because it's we women who fetch water anytime they come home to tell us that maybe there's an information that we'll get water we always try to encourage them or push them in a way that they will do any other means of maybe we getting it time.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So, the access of men to the water information before women, does it lead to .... Does it affect the relationship between men and women?
Translator:	It doesn't spoil any relationship because when they get information to.... When they get the information and inform you it is a good thing that is coming to both of us. So it doesn't spoil any relationship.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. That's good. Okay. So we are now coming to talk about water use planning, management and conflicts. Yeah. So the first thing we would like to know is that what has allowed her to plan her water use better?
Translator:	It is women who normally go to fetch water. So anytime they fetch they manage it in a way that it will be quality, they will make sure it is always neat for consumption and also manage it so that they wouldn't be using their energy all the time to go and be fetching water.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So how has she changed how she uses water because of the reasons that she just gave?.
Translator:	It's just through the education, that education that I had on the brave project. That's why I've decided to adopt those changes.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So now how has the brave helped you to manage your water better?
Translator:	The information or the education I've gotten from brave is how they have been asking us to clean our containers any time we want to harvest or fetch water, how to cover it and when and how to use it. That is what I've learned from it.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. so how about the whole community, how has the project helped them to be able to manage their boreholes and then wells?
Translator:	For the boreholes, we are taught to be cleaning it all the time, sweeping around. The same thing applies to the well. For the well we can't even clean the inside but we should make sure the environment is always clean and neat. It should always be clean and neat. So that whenever you're going to fetch you feel comfortable of going to a place like that to get your drinking water or water for usage.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. that's nice. Okay. Sothe boreholes and then the wells, do they have a body in place that helps in managing the boreholes and then the Wells?
Translator:	I can't tell for all the boreholes or the wells but for some I know we have organization that always take care or comes to monitor how active or how they are using it.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Which organization is that?
Translator:	For instance, World vision have given us a borehole. So for that one they always come to monitor to see how it is, in terms of whether it's use. World Vision normally comes to check whether it is in use and how they are taking good care of the environments, I mean within where the borehole is.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So the organization you mentioned is an organization that is coming from outside. So, now what we want to know is within here (community) are there groups or associations that help in managing the boreholes or wells?
Translator:	We have. I think the NGO or the World Vision for instance made us to choose three people who will be taking care of the borehole. The one in charge of cleaning, the one in charge of maybe making sure the place is always neat, the organizer and the one who be looking at the maintenance in case maybe there's a fault then he will report. But unfortunately, the one who was in charge of maybe making sure the place is always clean is no more. But the organizer and the one in terms of the maintenance, they are around. So anytime there is a meeting the organizer, always make sure he will call for the community to come out and listen to what the NGO or the World Vission have for them.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So is it the same for all the other boreholes?
Translator:	I think it's not different from the other boreholes. We also have community members who normally make sure things are in order.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So how did they choose the people who are in charge of making sure the boreholes are working?
Translator:	It is the community members who always decides to select their leaders. Normally what they look is or what they consider is those who are always closer to where the borehole is. They make sure that maybe if it is in front of someone house, either the person will be the one monitoring or the organizer, and the one who will also make sure there will be cleaning is not always far from the place too. So normally they look at the distance, those who are closer to where the borehole is, they are the very people the community members always decide to choose.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So would you like the district assembly to help with what water management?
Translator:	I would have been happy if they are also helping monitoring or managing the water.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So how would you want them to do that?
Translator:	If they are always helping managing eh, eh, they will be able to detect like where there's no water, I mean the community there is no water so that they will also make sure that those people too get theirs.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So would you say water usage sometimes results in the disagreements?
Translator:	Water usage sometimes lead to disagreement because they always cue, and sometimes when you come and meet me and you will want to fetch before me, I wouldn't take it easy. Sometimes too people use their basins or whatever they want to use to fetch to put it in the queue and they do that.... Some people will do that and go back to the house. So, when you come and realize that they have pushed yours or they've sent yours back, you will not also be happy. So, things like this always lead to misunderstanding between some of them.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So how has the brave project helped in improving these disagreements?
Translator:	Normally it's because we are always many at the borehole that leads to these disagreements. So what I normally do is this, when I get up in the morning and go to my garden, when I return in the afternoon that is the time I normally fetch my water because normally it's always in the morning and the evening that people always want to fetch, and that time they are always many. This is what always leads to the misunderstanding or disagreement between people. So, I always time and I realize that most at times in the afternoon, people are not always there. So that's the time I fetch my water from the information I normally hear from brave project.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So, would you like to invest in digging your own well?
Translator:	I would have been glad if I should get the opportunity to have my own well.
Shani Haruna:	Why?
Translator:	You can be insulted by someone you are older than, or someone you can even give birth to the person just because I've gone to a public borehole to fetch. But if I have my own, I don't think these things can happen to me.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. That's okay. So, what would you use your own well for if you were to dig a well?
Translator:	I would have been using it for domestic use in terms of cooking and drinking an even using it to also feed or I'll be .... My animals will also be drinking from it.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So besides that, are there other uses that you would use it for?
Translator:	Okay. Apart from the drinking the Bathing or also fetching for my animals to drink I don't think I'll be using it for any other thing for now.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So, what needs to happen to improve water access here?
Translator:	Assuming we get the opportunity to have more boreholes, wells and probably polytanks to always harvest rainwater during raining seasons, it will be good news because we will not be battling for water again because I think if it is abundant or if every community has, it will always be easy to access, which we'll be happy, which will bring happiness to us.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Has water use decision making process changed since the brave started? Water use decisions, have they changed?
Translator:	The change is that we always harvest or I always harvest the water and now I do manage how to use it. The additional thing is that, though we those who are having gardens always come together to dig. But unfortunately, due to the nature or the difficulties in it, one person doesn't own it. It's just the capacity that we don't.... We are not able to harvest or harvest but, there's change or we have improved on how we have been using water.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And then how has the brave helped you to improve on your income and assets?
Translator:	I have learned produce management on this brave project. Those days I didn't know how to manage my produce well. So anytime I even want to sell the quality is not always there. But due to this project I know how to manage for my products or my grains always look unique, and I don't also sell it in time like how I used to do. So, I will wait for the time there will be markets or the market prices will be high then I will then sell. Besides that, due to how I take care of the produce when I get to the market, it'll attract customers because of the unique nature of how I manage it.
Shani Haruna:	So, we will like to say thank you for speaking with us. We're so happy to speak with you and for you sharing your knowledge with us.
Translator:	She also appreciates your time for this interview and for you also appreciating her for making her to know that she also have an important thing to share.
