Shani Haruna:	This interview is with 403, annon number 005.
Translator:	I'm sahadatu mahama, the translator from 403 to Mr Shani.
Shani Haruna:	So well like you to state your full name and your date of birth or your age.
Translator:	403. She's 403. She's 28 years old. She is woman, female.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. do you hold any community position?
Translator:	No, she is .... She's not.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So, we would like you to explain what your understanding of the Brave project is.
Translator:	My understanding of farmer and water project is, we ... First we didn't know that .... The time we will weed our crops, but through this farmer and water project, we now know the period that we have to weed our crops.
Shani Haruna:	And what are other thing did you learn again under the under the brave project?
Translator:	I've learned on water .... Rainwater for .... Like harvesting rainwater and for the harvesting we have to use the first dirty water for plastering and bathing before we harvest the clean water and store.
Shani Haruna:	And what did you learn about groundwater? The water that comes into your boreholes and Wells and you fetch.
Translator:	We have sections in this Jawani. So our section, we don't have boreholes. Our boreholes are broken down. We used to fetch stream water, and stream water too is dirty water so we used to fetch and wash our things clean and put it inside.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So we're now going to talk about weather information and use. How did you find out information about the weather last season?
Translator:	I've had the information from radio station.
Shani Haruna:	Which radio station?
Translator:	Ura radio.
Shani Haruna:	And what did you hear about the weather? What did they say about the weather?
Translator:	I've heard that it will be normal rainfall. The rainfall will be normal, that's what they said.
Shani Haruna:	So the radio set that you listen to, is it ... Who owns it? Is it you or your husband?
Translator:	From which radio that brave project gave me. I'm hearing from that radio set.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And who uses it most? Is it you or your husband?
Translator:	I use it more than my husband.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And do you also get weather information from agric officers?
Translator:	Yes, I've ever heard information from MoFA. And it is in Jawani farmers ... Farmers water project group. I've heard it. The agric officers came as part of the brave project to give them information.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	How did he .... How did she find out information about the weather this season? The one that just ended.
Translator:	For the 2019 I've heard it from farmers water project in Jawani and in radio stations at ura radio.
Shani Haruna:	So apart from the farmers and water group and the ura radio, which other source did you hear about the weather from?
Translator:	No, only brief project and ura radio that I have bee hearing it.
Shani Haruna:	So in the future, what will be the best way for you to receive weather information?
Translator:	I would like to be hearing it from radio stations in future.
Shani Haruna:	Which radio stations?
Translator:	Radios ... I like to hear from radios like ura radio, Tizaa radio, Nobel radio, Eagle FM, Savannah tamale. Savannah radio.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. do you think men have more phones than women?
Translator:	Man ... Women have more phones than men because women have phones for their ... For musics and heart cooling because sometimes you have heart .... Is it heart broken or what? You use the phone to make your heart come down and you can make calls. Like if you have a problem and you want to consult your someone from somewhere, you just use that one to call and tell that person your problem.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Then the weather informations that she heard, what did she use it to do in her farming activities?
Translator:	I've used it by changing my farm land position because I was in a valley place or slope place. When it was said that there will be heavy rain, My husband collected that place for cultivation rice and give me another place for my cultivation this year. For slopy place you plough across the slope, the slope. But the this thing .... If you want to do bonding in your this thing, you put fertilizer bags .... You take fertilizer bags and full down with sand and put it for bonding.
Shani Haruna:	The land that she changed, what was she growing on it?
Translator:	The cultivation maize and millet. But because of the soil erosion, we made bonding and tie ridging at that place. But when I heard that this year it will be heavy.... There'll be heavy rainfall my husband changed the farm land and cultivate rice and change another land for me to cultivate my maize and Millet.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	So, why didn't you sow rice in that Valley but rather moved to different place to sow maize and millet?
Translator:	It was my husband's land that he gave to me. So because of .... Because it is valley and there was heavy rain this year, he decided to change land for me and take it for the rice cultivation.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	And what information do agric extention officers give her about water management when they visit?
Translator:	They ... I've learned .... The MoFA people .... I had an information from Mofa people on bonding and tie ridging on my farm for moisture conservation.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	And what information do they provide about weather?
Translator:	Can't remember what they've said again.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. what crops does she grow?
Translator:	I cultivate groundnuts, soyabean and Millet.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Where did she find out information about the crops that she mentioned last season and this season, the one that just ended?
Translator:	Yeah, I heard it from farmer and water project.
Shani Haruna:	Apart from the .... So apart from the farmer and water group, where else did she get information about her crops?
Translator:	From radio station. Eagle FM.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So the informations she has been hearing from the farmer and water group on the radio, what changes has she made to her farming ... Her farming activities?
Translator:	Because of this farmer and water project I've changed my ploughing, weeding, applying ... Application fertilizer application and now I'm able to get good yield in my farm. Unless, the previous farming, for the ploughing, I was using bullocks and Hands for the ploughing. But this ... Through this project I used to use a tractor service. For the weeding we use .... I used to just sow my this thing. If I ploughed and sowed I will go and relax. Unless I feel like going to the farm, I'll go and just do whatever I want to do. But now through this farmer and water project, I used to weed my crops on two weeks time. First for the application of the fertilizer, I used to apply the fertilizer when the maize getting ready to reap. But now within .... Through farmer and water project I used to apply the fertilizer at two weeks time and it is not just I'll just fetch and be putting, I'll drill under the crop before I put the fertilizer in.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Translator:	For the application of the fertilizer, the reason why I'm drilling before applying it, if you just put it like that, maybe by the end .... By the time you finish there will be rain, rain and it will wash it away. That's why we are drilling and putting it.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Translator:	I'm now monitoring .... Through farmer and water project, I'm now monitoring my this thing .... My groundnuts to see whether it is ready for harvesting. If I'm ... But previous, I was .... I would just sow it and go and lie down. Unless it start re-germination I won't go there to plug them because I will say that they have not yet ready. But now I'll monitor and pick it and see whether the husk is black or white. If it is black, they're okay for harvesting. For the maize too, I'm not monitoring them to see when I'll harvest it. Previous I was just .... I would just get sit down and see if I'm see that I came and see that the this thing .... Termites are ..... And that this thing .... I would start picking them and harvest. But now if I'm monitoring them. The time I'll just see one one having green leaves ... Green husk, that is the time that I will harvest it.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And how did you find the well monitoring training that you received?
Translator:	No, I didn't have training on ... About well monitoring.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And, do you think men and women have access to different information?
Translator:	Both men and women are the same infor .... Hearing the same information.
Shani Haruna:	Why do they .... Why do both men and women hear the same information or have same information?
Translator:	The have unity. Because of unity that's why they have the same information.
Shani Haruna:	And do men get more information about water than women?
Translator:	Women have more water information than men. Women have more info.... Water information than men.
Shani Haruna:	Why? Why do they have more information than men?
Translator:	It is women who fetch water. The men ... Because the men didn't have .... The reason why the men didn't have the information of water is that men .... Women are fetching water and men just .... They are just sitting down waiting for the woman to fetch water for them to bath or cook for them to eat. That is why they don't have the information of water.
Shani Haruna:	And does that affect the relation between men and women?
Translator:	No, it will not affect the relationship.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	So what do you normally use water for? What activities do you use water for?
Translator:	We use water for parboiling rice, drinking, bathing, washing, cooking, building, plastering and flooring.
Shani Haruna:	And how do you manage your water such that you are able to use it for all the activities that you have mentioned?
Translator:	For you ... You go and fetch the water, clean water, wash your pots, jerrycans and any container that you have or pot that you have, you clean it well and go and fetch water, put the lid on and put it safely for your house use.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And how has the brave project helped you to manage water better?
Translator:	You have it when the rain is falling. So you put it in your basin or jerrycan or pot then put it down. It is just you .... The built our capacity on harvesting water. We now cover our water ... Rainwater for our house use. Through farmer and water project discussion, they've built our capacity on harvesting water and keep it clean for usage. But unless previous time we used to just harvest the water and just put it down openly. We won't cover it. We just use it. But now we know that if you harvest water you have to put something .... Bring something and cover the water for the use of your house activities.
Shani Haruna:	And would you say that water usage .... It causes disagreements? The use of the boreholes and the wells, does it result in disagreements?
Translator:	Yes, it has an disagreement. Because if it is stream water you just go and fetch and turn. Nobody is there for you to have disagreement there. And if it is in the well, you have your container for fetching, you just come and fetch and go away. You will not have disagreement there. But if it is borehole, you get there and be there. Someone will come, later on the person will say, I'm the first person to fetch before you. And you too, you won't agree. There that the disagreement will come.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So how has the brave project helped you to improve these disagreements?
Translator:	Farmer and water projects have helped for dissolving disagreement because they've learned ... They've teach us on how to harvest water and if you have many containers to harvest the water, you won't go for water at the river or the well or the borehole to fetch water so that there will be disagreement. You harvest water in your containers, someone would harvest .... You wouldn't go there for disagreement.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And in your opinion, what do you think needs to happen to improve water access and management?
Translator:	In future, If we have have pipes in our houses and where we will get it is if we had community contribution, we will look for an NGO for drilling of the pipes for us in our community so that we'll get water
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Then finally, how has the brave helped to improve to increase your income?
Translator:	Through farmer and water project, we now have good care for our ruminants, which will improve our income. And for the maize .... Our farm products like maize, groundnuts, soyabean, rice. Farmer and water project have led us .... Made this thing .... Have good yield for good grains for sale. If anytime you wants to sell your product, you just sell and be laughing because they are good. They will just see it and come and buy without calling themselves, so you improve your income.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So we'll like to thank you for your time and knowledge and experiences that you have shared with us.
Translator:	I've also thanked for your experience and knowledge that you .... And capacity that brave have impact in us for us to be interviewed. God help you.
