Shani Haruna:	This is interview with 406 anon number 003. So 406  you are welcome to the interview.
406:	Thank you.
Shani Haruna:	Well like you to state your full name.
406:	My name is 406
Shani Haruna:	And what's your date of birth? How old are you?
Speaker 2:	My date of birth is 2nd January, 1973.
Shani Haruna:	And are you male or female?
406:	I'm female.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And, do you hold any community position here in Jawani?
406:	Yes, I'm a community health volunteer and community development volunteer.
Shani Haruna:	And that's nice. It's good to know. So now we would like you to explain what your understanding of the brave project is. In other words, what do you know about the brave project?
406:	Yes. brave project is about human livelihood and farming this thing .... It's about farming and water storage and livestock this thing ... About livestock rearing and farm activities.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So what did you learn about water?
406:	I learnt how to store water for our household and farm activities, using water in our farms. How to store and use it in our farms and our home activities.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So what did you learn about how to store water on your farms?
406:	I learned how to make .... I learned how to do bondings in our farms, to store this thing and how to plough our farms to maintain water in our farms and how to do conversational agric in our farms.
Shani Haruna:	And you also mentioned you learned something about livelihoods, what did you learn about livelihoods?
406:	Learn how to .... How to store our grains, to farm and get good grains and how to .... The storage of the grains and how to maintain our .... To manage our foods and animals.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	And you also mentioned that you learned something about water. What did you learn about groundwater? That's the water that comes into your boreholes and then the wells and you fetch for drinking or for other activities. What did you learn about the groundwater?
406:	I learned under .... I learned about digging the wells, hand-dug wells and boreholes for groundwater for household consumance.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Did you learn something about how to use the groundwater for farming activities?
406:	Yes. we have a small hand-dug well which we used to dig and use it for our dry season gardens.
Shani Haruna:	And where are those dug-outs located in the community?
Speaker 2:	We have our dug-out wells, some in the this thing ..... In by our houses and some like the one we use for the dry season gardens are in the river. We dug them in the river when it is dry season. We dug them in the river and fetch for our garden.
Shani Haruna:	So you mentioned dry season farming. How widespread is dry season farming here in Jawani? Are many people into the dry season farming?
406:	Yes. So far as we learn every day, every night, some people are going in for the dry season by .... Most of the community people are going in for dry season garden through this project.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Andwho would you say is going into the dry season farming more? Is it a men or a women?
406:	Youth and men. They are going for dry season and some women too are helping their children and their husbands to .... Some, but not all, few of women are helping their children and husbands.
Shani Haruna:	You said some help their children and their husbands to do the dry season farming. Why are they not doing the dry season themselves, but helping their children or their husbands?
406:	Okay. The women are engaged in so many things. Like by this time, the dry season in garden they're starting it but the men are still building ..... They are in building and by the time the men finish, the women have to plaster and floor and do the house flooring. So they don't have time, enough time to do their own gardens. That's why.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	So we're now coming to talk about access to weather information and how you use the weather information. So the first thing we would like to understand under the access to weather information is, how did you find out information about the weather last season?
406:	The last sseason weather was somehow better because we have enough rain and we have good yield, some. We have maize but the groundnuts was not good. But this 2019 we have so many yield on groundnuts and millet low yield. So that's the information I had for the this thing ..... 2018 and 2019 we have some .... Last 2018, we had so much millet but 2019 we have low millet, small millet. But 2018 we have .... We didn't get groundnuts but 2019 we had groundnuts.
Shani Haruna:	So, what do you think is the reason for you getting a low yields for millet last year as compared to the last two years and then a higher groundnuts yields this year, but low groundnuts yields last year. What is the reason behind that?
Speaker 2:	Okay. The reason was, last two years the this thing .... The rainfall was good. But the groundnuts I can't best tell what .... Is it that the rain was not enough for the groundnuts or is too much for the groundnuts. But this time .... This year the groundnuts was perfect because the rain was okay. But the millet was not good because the rain was too much for the maize. The maize was already fruiting when the rain was still coming that caused the low yield for the maize.
Shani Haruna:	And where did you hear information about the weather from?
406:	The weather, last two years I was hearing it in our meetings and radio station, but this year, this year too, this project .... Brave project. I was hearing it from brave project, radio stations and still our meetings. We have meetings in this community. So I was hearing it from gmet people at assembly. We used to have a participatory scenario planning meetings. So I was hearing it. Last two years I was hearing it in that participatory scenario planning meeting and 2019 I was hearing from brave project which is from Ghana gmet.
Shani Haruna:	You mentioned you have some groups here in Jawani where you get some weather information. We would like you to say a little bit more about those groups. What are the groups for? And what do they do?
406:	We have vsla groups, community development groups and health groups. So any groups at all ... So far as I'm among the this thing .... Community development, I used to be there so that I was hearing it from the community. Whoever hear it from radio station he'll come to that meeting and share it. VSLA groups, they will come to that place and share it. And I myself, I have been sharing it. If I hear it from Gmet people, I'll share it in that meetings.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	So in those meetings how do they get the weather information to you? Do they come there to inform you about the weather? Or how do they get the messages to you?
406:	They also hear .... They also get the information from radio stations. They normally hear the information from radio stations.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	So you mentioned you got information about the weather .... You mentioned you had information about the weather last season and this season. So now we would like to know, what did you use the information you got about the weather to do?
406:	Okay. The weather .... Last two years season I was not able to use that weather to do my this thing .... But this 2019 weather I've heard it, I used that weather to do my farming. So far as I heard that there will be rainfall .... Too much rainfall, normal rainfall and I decided to do the thins thing .... To convey water for storage for my activity because I was planning to build. So I was able to store water and whenever I go to the farm, if it is ... If I saw clouding, because of the thunder and the Lightining, I have to come home because my farm is not far from the house. And when I use that information to share it to my people or my community people to know about the weather, the 2019 weather this thing .....
Shani Haruna:	Okay. you mentioned you farmed groundnuts this year. So we would like to know, how did you use .... How did the weather information help you in your groundnut farming?
406:	It helps me a lot because I was .... I just farmed small .... I sowed small groundnuts but I had it enough because I sowed it last week of May. And that was what I heard, if I sowed that period I'll get the groundnuts, that's why I sowed it that .... But the last two years I sowed on April, so I couldn't get it.
Shani Haruna:	How about the maize? How did you ....?
406:	I sowed the maize on that May - June. And because of that, that I lost the maize because the rain was too much. It rains when it was ready for fruiting.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And did you have to maybe ..... Did you have to maybe change new varieties because you heard information about the weather?
406:	Yes, I changed. I used the this thing .... When I was to sow the maize, I went and bought wandata and I bought fertilizer and I bought soya bean from agric this thing .... People. From agric people that I bought that maize for my planting this year. I was using what I harvested in my farm. I was using that. But the millet I used what I planted last two years to plant. But when I bought that this thing .... The maize from the agric this thing .... I have my this thing my maize correct.
Shani Haruna:	So what did they tell you about the new varieties that made you to buy it and then stop using your old variety? So what did they tell you about the new varieties and rainfall that made you to buy and use them?
406:	They said that it an improved variety. If you have .... If you are able to use it, you will get good yield if you follow the instructions or the this thing to sow it and use fertilizer, it to yield well.
Shani Haruna:	Anddid they tell you something about the requirements of those varieties?
406:	Yes, but I can't recall it because we have 90 days with some amount of water this thing. They've told me, but I can't remember the water this thing. But the days, 90 days, 110 days variety, but I use the 90 days variety.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So now, the weather information that you mentioned you received, in the future what do you think is the best way for you to get such information?
406:	We have .... Maybe it will continue in the this thing .... Radid stations for us to be hearing or we will request gmet people because we can't just say that we will hear it from brave because brave will wind up. We'll look for gmet people or weather this thing .... Radio stations to hear information.
Shani Haruna:	So how would you look for them? How will you look for the gmet or the radio stations to get the information?
406:	We last had the gmet people number, the one who came here for brave .... Whom brave brought to us. We had the number, but still we'll look for a brave people like you Mr Shani to hear about the this thing .... The weather information. If we contact you people, you'll lead us to get this thing .... The information.
Shani Haruna:	And apart from us, where do you think, or how would you get in contact with the weather people to get the information?
406:	If not brave people, maybe you get the contact like this and you won't get the this thing. You collect the contact and you may lost your this thing .... Your phone. You wouldn't get the contact again to call the Gmet people. And if you didn't hear from radio station, you can't get the information.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So you mentioned that you listen to radio stations. The radio sets you listen to, who owns that radio set?
406:	We have so many radio stations. We have Eagle FM at Walewale, we have Tizaa radio at Nalerigu, we have Nobel radio at Nalerigu and we have URA radio at Bolga. So those radio stations that we can hear and Tamale, GBC, Zaa radio, Savanna radio, all the radio station which can reach to our end.
Shani Haruna:	What .... I was .... What you mentioned are the radio stations that you get. But we would like to know, the wireless set that you use to listen to the radio .... The wireless sets ..... Who are the owners of the wireless sets? Who owns them?
406:	The wireless sets ..... We the this thing .... The group .... We the group we have wireless sets which has been given by brave project. We are listened to .... We will use that to listen for the this thing and some men have their own radio sets in their houses, women too have radio sets. They will listen to that radio sets. We have youth too who have their own radio sets, they will use that ones to listen.
Shani Haruna:	Then men and women here, who do you think listen to radio more?
406:	Okay, the men .... Now a days, from 2018 to this time both men and women are listen to radio stations because we had so many informations that we have been hearing from radio stations, especially the radio stations which we have regular in our this thing .... In our community like Nobel radio. Any time men and women are eager to listen to that because of their jingles.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	Then, do you think men have more phones than women here in the community?
406:	Oh now, men .... Both youth and women have phones than men self.
Shani Haruna:	And why is that so?
406:	Most at times the women have the phones for their ... For this thing .... The music. They use it for music and the men .... The youth .... Some of the men have contacts like how I'm having my this thing .... I have it for informations .... To hear your formation. We have radio sets in that phones too. Some are using the phones for their radio .... Listening of their radio information.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. then how regular do extension officers visit you to give you information about your farming?
406:	Okay. Mostly .... We .... Sometimes ..... We didn't have extension agent in our communities for the past years. It is just because of the shortage of the extension officers. But this year they gave us extension officer for our area. So we think this year around we will have regular visits, but the previous years we they will just visit us once a while.
Shani Haruna:	So the new person that you mentioned has been given to you as the extension officer, has he already visited?
406:	Yes, he came here for about three times.
Shani Haruna:	And what information did he give to you about water management?
406:	Not yet. The information was just, he came to tell us the the thing ..... About the improve seeds for the season. And later on he asked for registration of cashew planting and registration for those who have cashew trees. That is the information that he has brought so far.
Shani Haruna:	And did he or she give you information about how the weather would go?
406:	Okay. Yes, because we have been given the information before he came, so he emphasized on it on weather information that we heard.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. You mentioned you farmed maize and groundnuts last season. How did you find out information about your maize and groundnut?
406:	My information from? I had the information on planting of the crops from agric extension people. I went for a meeting. So I came and tell and spread the information to the community about how to use the this thing that crops .... The improved variety and when to plough, when to sow and the time to apply fertilizer, and when to see .... When it is having an insects in it, how to know that your things are having insects and where to go. And the place that you go for the this thing .... For the solution is to go to the agric office and tell them. And this time they were given a this thing ..... Chemical to come and put for the this thing .... The insects or the this thing ... Or it was some caterpillars. So they will give you the this thing, but as for my farm I didn't realize the this thing .... The pests in my this thing. So I didn't go. But some, I went and visit because I was a VBA in that community. So I went and visit a farm and I saw the this thing. So I report to the agric people, and that person I told him to go to agric and collect the this thing for the farm.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	So, where did you attended the meeting where you had the information about the crops?
406:	I attend the meeting both Gambaga and Tamale. I went for a brave meeting at Tamala and I heard it. I went for a WAP meeting at Gambaga, I've heard it. So I brought that back to the community and share the information.
Shani Haruna:	You mentioned WAP. What is WAP?
406:	It is Womens in Agriculture platform.
Shani Haruna:	And what do they do?
406:	They do .... It's just like how brave people are doing .... Farming activities and planting for food and job .... This thing like fertilizer, improved seeds, they are just doing farming activity. They educate people on farming activities and they insist in woman farming.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	Then in the future, what do you think would be the best way for you to receive information about your farming activities?
406:	Like if we have .... We would have have a this thing .... Radio station in our this thing or communication center in our this thing ..... Information center in our community. And if not that we will just be hearing it from radio stations as I said.
Shani Haruna:	Then what changes did you make in your farming activities because you heard the information on the radio?
406:	I changed a lot because how I was farming, I reduced my farming land .... My farm land. For the year, I just farmed small and I was able to weed it, get fertilizer, apply it as it's supposed to be. And because of that I had enough food from that small portion. So I realized that if I hear the information I have to manage and I will be able to do it well and get good yield.
Shani Haruna:	And what changes did you make to your livestock rearing?
406:	My livestock rearing I used to convey this thing.... Beans.... I Used to store beans ... If they threshed beans, I'll conveyed that this thing for my livestock .... The feeding of my livestock. I used to feed them in the house. I didn't just leave them to be roaming or alone. In the evening I'll make sure that all of my this thing are in the house. That is what I changed. The feeding .... I change the feeding and the keeping them in the house. I don't leave them to be roaming about in the night, but in the afternoon I still let them roam.
Shani Haruna:	So we're now coming to discuss well monitoring training and then use. So how did you find the well monitoring training that you received?
406:	We used to .... We monitor it by keeping it clean, good sanitation and the water too we closed the well. It have a lid which we used to close it and we wash around, sweep around the wells and we fetch .... We use, we have a rope that we are using to fetch the water. We don't use any rope to tie the this thing and fetch.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. did they show you how to measure the water levels in your wells?
406:	No, they didn't show us unless the borehole that we .... The one .... The broken down one that we were measuring, but the well we didn't measure it the well, we don't measure it.
Shani Haruna:	The broken borehole that you mentioned you used to measure the .... The non-functioning borehole that you mentioned that you used to take the water leve measurements, what did you do with the measurements that you took?
406:	They used to come and collect it from Accra. The data, if you measure and record the data, they used to come and collect and go to Accra.
Shani Haruna:	And what did you do with it personally? The data that you recorded, what were you doing with it? Did you use it to do something on your own?
406:	No, I didn't.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. do you think men have different .... Have access to different information here, and then women too have access to different information?
406:	They don't access different information because any information at all they've heard, both men and women all are having it in the same views.
Shani Haruna:	And do you think that men get more information about water than women?
406:	No. Women get more information about water than men. If not dry season like this, like when they want water to build their houses, they don't have more information, or they went for fishing. But women have more access in water than men because they use the water frequently.
Shani Haruna:	So does that affect the relationship between men and women here?
406:	No, it doesn't affect because they know they use water when they need it in their work and women too use water when they need it. And if it is time for water ..... If dry season we don't get water, men will organize and come and get well .... Hand-Dug wells .... Small wells for them, but now we have our own wells in the this thing, so they don't have problem with that.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	So we're now coming to talk about water use, management and the disagreements. So what do you normally use water for?
406:	We use it for building, washing, cooking and drinking.
Shani Haruna:	And what do you think has helped you to plan your water use better?
406:	If you store ... The storage will let you use it better. If you store it well, if you make well .... Good storage, you can manage and having it enough. If you have enough water it will help manage water usage.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And how has the brave project helped you to manage water better?
406:	They built my capacity on storage of water and harvesting of water. That made .... The built my capacity. They built my capacity on storage and harvesting.
Shani Haruna:	Which other knowledge did you acquire that has helped you to manage water better either in the house or on your farm?
406:	The this thing .... Bonding. The boundaries in the farm. I have the knowledge on boundary in the farm, which will manage my water for my farming.
Shani Haruna:	Then you mentioned boreholes, wells and hand-dug wells. Do you have committees that are responsible for managing them?
406:	Okay. The wells, we have committee for that wells. And we have committee for boreholes which is functioning.
Shani Haruna:	How .... What do they do?
406:	They meets and get the problems of the boreholes. And they hold a meetings for that and they will contribute monies for borehole repairing or wells repairing because wells too they refloor it and they used to buy key or this thing for the wells.
Shani Haruna:	And how many people are in a committee?
406:	The well side, it is about four people. We have the chairperson, secretary, organizer and treasurer. But the borehole side we have nine. We have the chairman and the vice, we have sanitation and the vice and mechanic and the treasurer, the secretary.
Shani Haruna:	So before those people are chosen as members, how are they selected?
406:	They had a community meeting and select them. It was a community meeting. They conduct community meeting and they selected them. They select .... They nominate the chairperson and the this thing .... The secretaries and son on.
Shani Haruna:	And before you can be a member, what do they look out for in a person before he or she is selected as committee member?
406:	They will look at your this thing .... Your patience, truth, transparency, regular in meetings, and what .... Humble. That's what I can remember.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	Then, the use of the boreholes and then the wells, does it normally result in disagreements? The use of the boreholes, the wells and then the hand-dug .... The dug-outs that you mentioned do they normally result in disagreements?
406:	Yes, they result because some .... Someone will come early and some will come late and wants to fetch before the other, there will be a misunderstanding there. And through the contribution someone will contribute and some wouldn't contribute and that person will come for the water .... To fetc the water. If the committee member is there or any person who knows that that person didn't contribute it will result a this thing .... A problem. And some too ..... Some members too, some will bring two ..... It will come to some time that the water is not enough there. So, someone will come and bring two containers to fetch at the same time. The other person wouldn't agree. It will result ....
Shani Haruna:	And how are those the disagreements normally resolved?
406:	Okay. They will ... The committee will sit down and get a solution. They will call a meeting to solve it out.
Shani Haruna:	And how has the brave project helped in improving or reducing some of these disagreements?
406:	They .... Through the capacity building, they used to talk on how to be with a group or how to be a leader in a group or in a community. So through that, if you take that this thing .... You take that knowledge to solve the this thing .... The committee will take that knowledge to solve it.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	Then, in your opinion, what do you think needs to happen so that you can have more access to water here in Jawani?
406:	Okay. if brave people will have another ..... We have CRS people have this REST project, and they say REST1 REST2. So if Brave people would have be brave2 in our community we would have appeal to them to help us in getting that in our community.
Shani Haruna:	So apart from brave, which other sources or which other way do you think that you could have access to more water sources?
406:	We .... Like the this thing .... The wells that we have, there was a project, I forgot of that project. We .... I this thing .... Lobbied to that project. So we have to be lobbying to NGOs so that they will help bring that project to our community to help.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	Would you like to involve the local district assembly in water management?
406:	Yes. Even our boreholes, we used to go to them, they dug some for us. So we would like assembly to be part, we'll lobby in assembly.
Shani Haruna:	And how do you think the brave has helped you to increase your income?
406:	Oh, brave have helped a lot because we learned how to plan our farm activities. We learned so much from brave on farming, crops, variety of .... Seed varieties and so on, and how to do it. And if you get that knowledge and apply it in your farm, you have to get ... You'll get good yield. And if you get good yield, you get .... Your financial problem will solve because you sell some from your farm or your .... The rearing of .... We learned a lot on rearing of livestock. So if you get good livestock, you can sell some and solve your financial issues.
Shani Haruna:	So if you compare your ... Like how was your yields this year as compared to othe years?
406:	Okay. I've already said it. This year we have enough rain, but the millet, it has spoilt the millet. The rain has spoilt the millet. So we had enough .....
Shani Haruna:	Maize or millet?
406:	Hey, millet, millet. Did I say maize? The rain has spoilt the millet, but the groundnuts we had it correct. Only the millet it has spoilt. So we have so many .... This year too only the millet that we didn't get but last two years we had the millet too and we didn't get the groundnuts.
Shani Haruna:	So how many bags or basins did you get this year as compared to the other years?
406:	Last two years I ploughed three acres of groundnuts. So I had three bags out of the tree. But this year I ploughed three acres, I plant this thing .... I sowed groundnut .... Three varieties of groundnuts. I sowed sam nut, Nkatie SARI, and our local this thing .... Groundnuts. And I sowed maize, millet in that this thing and small soya bean ..... That same three acres. But I had our own groundnuts .... I had seven bags, I had the sam nuts four bags and I have the NKatie SARI one back, and I had two backs of maize. And the millet .... As for the millet I ploughed another ..... I just did converational agric. So I add them and the maize was two. Only the maize that I didn't get that this thing. Out of that three acres that I have seven bags of groundnuts, two bags of maize, four bags of sam nut, one bag of Nkatie SARI and small portion of soya bean.
Shani Haruna:	So we would like to thank you for your time and for you sharing your experiences with us. We're so happy speaking to you and grateful to you for your time.
406:	Thank you too.
