Shani Haruna:	This interview is with 407 annon number 004.
Translator:	My name is Sahadatu Mahama. I am a translator to 407 .... From 407 to Mr Shani.
Shani Haruna:	We would like to know her full name.
Translator:	My name is 407.
Shani Haruna:	What is her date of birth?
Translator:	She says the five years.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Is she male or female?
Translator:	She's a female.
Shani Haruna:	Do you hold a community position?
Translator:	Yes, she is politician. She's the women's organiser ....
Shani Haruna:	What do you know about the brave project?
Translator:	They have come to teach knowledge that will benefit us. I know it to be farmer and water. I have learned .... This water, when it rained, we did'nt know you have to harvest and store the water so that you can have till the dry season.
Shani Haruna:	What else did you learn again?
Translator:	What I learned again in the farmer and water group is that we didn't know if you are farming on slopy land, you have to plough across the slope so that when it rains the water won't wash the crops away. We used plough along the slope. In the farmer and water group we learned that you plough across the slope so that water won't wash the soil away. When you finish ploughing across the slope, you go to the end of the farm land and make a big ridge across the slope so that when it rains the water will remain on the farm and not run away.
Shani Haruna:	What did you also learn about livestock rearing?
Translator:	I have learned a lot in livestock rearing. Because in the dry season we use to leave the livestock to roam, but since I joined the farmer and water groupd, after harvesting your cowpea, you harvest the stalks and come keep at home and feed to the animals during the dry season when the grasses are burnt.
Shani Haruna:	We're now coming to talk about access to weather information and what you use the information to do. So how did find out information about the weather last season?
Translator:	We had the weather information from the farmer and water group. They taught that if the rains will be so much .... There are some years the rains will come very high and other years it will rain not much. Last year the rain was normal. We heard it will rain a lot. We heard the information from the brave people and gmet, and mofa officers from Gambaga. We heard information from Gmet people and brave people and agric officers ... From agric offices.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So the agric officers how did they get the information to her?
Translator:	They came with brave people in Jawani.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So apart from the agric and then the brave, which other sources did she get weather information from?
Translator:	I've heard it from rain gauge recorders.
Shani Haruna:	So how .... For thisyear or this season, how did she find out information about the weather?
Translator:	That she heard from agric people, brave, gmet and rain gauge recorders.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So the weather information that she had ... The weather information that she had, what did she use that information to do in her farming activities?
Translator:	I've used it for my boundary. That's what ..... I have learned to plant legumes in my maize or millet.
Shani Haruna:	How did she .... How did the weather information help her to start sowing her ...The crops that she grows?
Translator:	The information helped me to plant improved variety and it helped me not to farm along the this thing ... Slope ... The stream. And changed my land for where I used to plant maize and there will be water in which it won't do I change it to sow rice. That is what it helped me, change the maize variety.
Shani Haruna:	So what about ... What the new variety are you now sowing?
Translator:	I've bought three months variety from the input dealers.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	What about the groundnuts?
Translator:	As for the groundnuts, I didn't plant, I didn't sow groundnuts. So I'm planning to sow this season coming because last year I don't have money to buy groundnuts. That's why I didn't sow groundnuts.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So the weather information that she mentioned she heard, in the future, what would be the best way for her to receive it?
Translator:	If brave people are still there, I will be hearing it from brave people and if they wind up they should try to let, let me hearing it in radio stations.
Shani Haruna:	So apart from the radio stations, which other means does she think that will the best for her to hear about the weather information?
Translator:	From radio, TV stations too is possible for me to be hearing.
Shani Haruna:	So apart from radio and then the TV which other means do you think that everybody here in Jawani will be able to hear information about the weather?
Translator:	Brave people can build ... Will build information center for the community to be hearing and the nearby communities.
Shani Haruna:	Men and women, who listen more to the radio here in Jawani ?
Translator:	Women listen more than men because men used to go to farm and leave their radio set and women too have their own radio sets. So they used to be in the house. So they normally operate when the husband is not there.
Shani Haruna:	So when the man is going to the farm don't the women go with them?
Translator:	Women too are going to farm but mostly men have work in the farm more than the women. And some woman doesn't go to farm because they have their sons' wives in the house. So they used to be in the house any time at all. That's why they listen more than the men.
Shani Haruna:	And men .... Do men have phones more than women here in Jawani?
Translator:	Almost both men and women have, especially the youth girls and boys. They have it equal.
Shani Haruna:	So how often do agric extension officers visit to give you information about your farming activities?
Translator:	Farming season, they used to come here farming season.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. How regular? Is it weekly, monthly or yearly?
Translator:	Two months interval.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So, what information do they provide you when they come?
Translator:	The information that bringing is weather information. They used to bring weather information, seeds ... Improves seeds and this time around planting for food and jobs for fertilizer,
Shani Haruna:	Then, what information do they normally give to her about water management?
Translator:	We should not let children play with our boreholes for them to spoil the boreholes and we should fetch water and have a lid for the pot or the drum that you kept the water in so that the water will be clean for your usage.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. and what advice do they give you about your water management on the farm?
Translator:	We shouldn't wash in water .... Stream waters. And we shouldn't do drink ponds water. If there's a pond in your this thing ... You shouldn't use it and stream water too, we shouldn't wash things inside the water.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So, the crops that you grow, where did you find information about them last season? Last season and then this season?
Translator:	We heard the information from brave with agric officers and the radio station.
Shani Haruna:	So in the absence of the brave project, do they have access to the agric extension officers?
Translator:	We will get the information from radio stations and agric .... Mofa office.
Shani Haruna:	So the MoFA office, how do you get access to them?
Translator:	We will get the information from our community extension officer.
Shani Haruna:	What changes did you make in your farming or livestock activities as a result of the information you heard on the radio?
Translator:	I've made a changes on fertilizer application because previously I used to just fetch and put it down. But now I use to drill under the plant before I put the fertilizer.
Shani Haruna:	So what other change did she make again in her crop production?
Translator:	I made a changes in my
Speaker 3:	Groundnuts. I used to plant groundnuts .... Sow groundnuts and if it is not regerminating, I wouldn't go there for harvesting. But now I'll monitor the groundnuts until I picked one and I removed one and see whether it is okay for harvesting and I'll dehusk and see the husk will be black and I will know that it is now ready for harvesting. It will not regerminate again.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. what about new varieties of maize or groundnut, what changes did you make in your ... In varieties that you plant?
Translator:	There is changes and the improved variety because we used to plant .... To sow late maize and we would be hungry when the maize are not yet ready for consuming. But now through brave project we have to .... We are planting the improved variety and by the time you will be hungry the things too are ready for consumption.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So how did you find the well monitoring training that you received?
Translator:	No, I'm not part of the well committee, so I don't have training. I didn't receive any training on that.
Shani Haruna:	And do you think men and women have access to different information?
Translator:	Previously, We have different informations, but now men and women, because of gender issues, men and women are having the same information equal.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Sowhat different like .... What different information did men receive in the past?
Translator:	Previously, men was having farming activities information and women doesn't have it, but now both men and women are all having the same information on farming activities. Previously, the men were not accompanying people to .... Their women to health facilities, but now health issues are both men and women activities which they are doing. If a woman is going for weighing most of the mens accompany their womens to .... For weighing and health activities that they ... If a child is sick now and a woman is not in the house self you come and get that the man has just .... Have already sent the child to the hospital.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	So what about water issues? Do men .... Men and women who have more information about water issues in Jawani?
Translator:	Women have information on water than men, women have information on water than men.
Shani Haruna:	Why do women have more information on water than men?
Translator:	If there is no water in the house, they will ask woman not a man.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So why would they ask a woman and not the man?
Translator:	Woman I used to fetch water for house activities. Men doesn't go for water for house activities.
Shani Haruna:	So the fact that women have more information about water, does that result or affect the relationship between men and women?
Translator:	Its nature. It won't spoil the relationship, it is nature and men are not using water than women and they also know that it is not a problem.
Shani Haruna:	So we're now going to talk about water use, management and disagreements. So what does she use water for?
Translator:	I use it for cooking, drinking, washing. Bathing, rice parboiling, shea nut parboiling, plastering of houses, flooring of houses.
Shani Haruna:	So how has the brave project helped you to manage your water usage better?
Translator:	Brave project helped me to know that you can harvest water in raining season and store it for dry season activities like plastering, flooring of this thing .... Houses.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And do you ... Does the use of the boreholes and the wells .... Does it result in disagreements in Jawani?
Translator:	No, we don't have disagreements.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	And so how has the brave helped you to increase your income?
Translator:	Help me to improve my income by early harvesting of maize and groundnuts because we used to leave the groundnuts be regermination and the maize too you get to have termites in the this thing ... It will fall down and termites and weevils will enter before you harvest it, and through brave project that is not doing again. That is not happening again. If you harvest them early you have enough for sale and consumption .. House consumption. It helped me to know that you have to select the good grains from the bad ones. And through that selection you have good market than the others.
Shani Haruna:	What about livestock? How has it helped in improving her livestock activities?
Translator:	Brave project helped me to know that you have to guide your livestock in before it can safe. Previously we just leave them outside and you will get to know that they have stolen them, but through brave project we are guiding them and we now have them for our problems.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Then in her opinion, what needs to happen so that you can have more access to water?
Translator:	My opinion is, brave project, if they can help us get someone to ... An NGO to come and drill wells for us in their community.
Shani Haruna:	So apart from the brave project, what .... Where does she think that maybe you can go and ask like for them to help with the water sources?
Translator:	We'll, we will go to district assembly. We will tell district assembly for the this thing .... For drilling of the wells.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	So how would they .... How would she like the district assembly to get involved?
Translator:	Responsible for the community or they're distant. They are responsible for the this thing .... For that, for drilling of boreholes and wells.
Shani Haruna:	So we'll like to thank her so much for her time and for the knowledge and experiences that she has shared with us.
Translator:	She thanked you too for this .... She thanked you too for the recording.

