Shani Haruna:	This interview is with 410, annon number 010.
Translator:	My name is Sahadatu Mahama. I'm a translator from 410 to Mr Shani.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So we would like to know her full name.
Translator:	Her name is 410. She's 65 years old. She's female.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. does she hold any community positions?
Translator:	No.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Sowe now ... We now want her to explain what her understanding of the brave project is.
Translator:	They ... They've encouraged us .... Brave has encouraged us to have improve things in our community to develop our community.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. What kind of encouragement do they give you?
Translator:	They encourage us on farming activities to have good yields in our farms.
Shani Haruna:	What did you learn about water under the brave project?
Translator:	We harvest ... I have learned harvesting of water and if you're going to harvest the water you have to let the first water drop before you put something to harvest the water.
Shani Haruna:	What first water?
Translator:	Water which is coming .... Which the rain in starts. The start water. When it starts, we shouldn't harvevest it, you shouldn't collect it. You should let it fall and you ... It will clean the this thing ... The zinc before you take the ... You put something to harvest it.
Shani Haruna:	Then what did you learn about your boreholes and then your Wells?
Translator:	I learned the cleanness of the water. Borehole water is clean than the stream water and well too is clean. The reason why borehole is clean is that the water from the borehole doesn't have any dirt in it because it is on the ground ... Under the ground. But the stream water, they used to ... It used to run and they wash clothings inside it. Pigs are swimming in it. That's why I said it's not good for consumption.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And where did she find out information about the weather last season?
Translator:	I heard the information from brave people ... Brave project.
Shani Haruna:	How did they get the information to her?
Translator:	They came to our committee for meeting ... Group meeting and they told us the ... I heard the information at that meeting.
Shani Haruna:	What did she hear about the weather?
Translator:	They say we will have enough rain this .... There is a normal rain this year and we will have lightining, thunders and cloundy .... Lightining and thunders this year and the rain will be above rainfall this year.
Shani Haruna:	And where did ... How did she find out information about the weather this season?
Translator:	The same brave project that I've heard the information.
Shani Haruna:	So apart from the brave project, which other source did she hear information about the weather?
Translator:	From radio stations like the Tizaa radio, Nobel radio, URA FM and Eagle FM
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And what did she use the information to do?
Translator:	I use improve variety ... Early variety to plant in my farm for the rain this thing .... Pattern. Because if I plant early variety for the starting I'll get it, and if in the middle too I plant since there will be rain I'll have it. So I did that.
Shani Haruna:	So apart from the early varieties, what other changes did she use the info ... The weather information to make one her farm?
Translator:	I prepare my land for ploughing and if it rains I will go and plough for the rain ... Onset the rain to come so that hour I'll Just go and plant my this thing .... Groundnuts or maize.
Shani Haruna:	So in the future, what would be the best way for her to receive the Weather information?
Translator:	I will still have my ... Get my information from brave project and radio stations.
Shani Haruna:	So apart from the brave and then the radio station, which other means do you think is best for you to get weather information?
Translator:	I'll be hearing the information from a phone calls and ... That's phone calls with the radio stations.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Do you think men listen to the radio more than women?
Translator:	Listen to radio discussion then radio information than men. Women listen to radio information than men.
Shani Haruna:	Why do you think women listen more than men?
Translator:	Women listen to radio than ... Radio information than men because women have time for radio information than men.
Shani Haruna:	And do you think men have more phones than women?
Translator:	Men have phones than women because men have less expenditure than women. Women have more expenditure.
Shani Haruna:	Why do women have more expenditure than men?
Translator:	Men have less expenditure because they don't give housekeeping money for the house consumption. Even there is a time ... Getting to May ... Is it May, June or .... April, May, June .... If not women who are feeding the house ... Men cannot feed house again. Women are buying food and ingredience for the house to be satisfied.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. what kind of information do agric extension officers give about water management when they visit?
Translator:	They normally give health ... Personal hygiene information on water for the farmers. They talked on water management for farm ... Our crops that we should level our this thing .... Farm land before sowing our crops to have good yield. How we can do and manage water in our farms for the crops.
Shani Haruna:	So what crops do you grow?
Translator:	I normally cultivate maize and okro.
Shani Haruna:	Then how did you find out information about the maize and okro?
Translator:	Brave people showed how to .... I learned from brave group how to sow .... To do my sowing in the farm and most I didn't change my variety. I am just using what I've been using because I don't have money for the seeds to buy.
Shani Haruna:	Apart from the brave, which other source did you get your information about that maize?
Translator:	I hadthe information from the VSLA groups.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. then, the informations that you have been hearing on the radio what changes
Speaker 2:	To your farming activities Did you use that information to make?
Translator:	I've been doing conversational agric but now I used to plough one acre through this thing .... Brave project that changed me on my farming activities. So I used to plough one acre which I can manage and get good yield.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	How did you find the Well monitoring training that you received?
Translator:	She didn't ... She didn't get any monitoring training.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. then do you think men and women have access to different information?
Translator:	Both men and women have the same information because men are not part of group meetings with agric people. But women .... Most of the women are in groups and they hear the information from groups and they go home and shared the information with their husbands in the house. So they all have the same information all together.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And do you think men get more information about water than women?
Translator:	Women have water information than men. Because women fetch water for home activities and everything. So they have information than men.
Shani Haruna:	And does that affect the relationship between men and women?
Translator:	It will not have any affect because they know that women are fetching water for them to do everything. So they will not have ... It will not have affect.
Shani Haruna:	So we're now coming to talk about water use, management and disagreements. So what does she use water for?
Translator:	We use water for Bathing, cooking, drinking, building of houses, Plastering, Flooring of houses and washing.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So how has the brave helped you to manage your water use better?
Translator:	Brave project .... To manage water is we should fetch water and keep it in a clean containers, cover it from dust.
Shani Haruna:	And would she say that the use of that water sources, that's the boreholes and the wells, result in disagreements?
Translator:	No, there is no disagreement in boreholes or ... There is no disagreement in boreholes or wells.
Shani Haruna:	Why are there no disagreements? Or you haven't experienced it yet?
Translator:	I haven't experienced it yet.
Shani Haruna:	So in her opinion, what does she think needs to happen to improve water access and management?
Translator:	Opinion is if brave would have give us boreholes or assembly .... Assembly would have, give us a borehole. District assembly sould have give us borehole.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Then how has the bave helped her to increase her income?
Translator:	It helped us to manage our livestock rearing through the feeding and the gathering of the livestock in the house and for them not to be roaming about for thieves to steal them. So they're just .... If you are feeding them well, they used to be healthy and you can sell them at any time you want and they are well for good market.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And what about the crops? How?
Translator:	I cleaned my maize for ... And the maize have good yield and the storage, I put thngs on the room with a ventilation for it to be good and when ever I want to sell, I will take it and get good market for that.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So we'd like to thank youfor your time and the experience and knowledge you have shared with us.
Translator:	I also thanked for the time you've used for interviewing me. Thank you.
