Shani Haruna:	This is interview with Mr. 305, annon number 008. So sir we would like to know your full name, date of birth, and whether you are male or female.
305	I am a male. I am 15 September 49 born. What, what else did you say?
Shani Haruna:	What's your name? Your full name?
305	Full name is 305.  305 is my first name.
Shani Haruna:	And do you hold any community position here?
305	I am an elder in the chief's palace and well I look like a leader in the organization. So I'm the coordinator of some of these activities or groups.
Shani Haruna:	And besides that are there other roles that you play? What other positions do you hold?
305	Committees like the school management committee, the health committee, I serve in some of these committees.
Shani Haruna:	Okay sir. That's good to know now. So sir, the other thing we would like to know is what is your understanding of the brave project?
305	The brave project, My understanding is water management, climate change effect on our farming processes and the studies and observations you are supposed to understand and Cope up with the challenges that are attached to it.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So what did you learn about water under the brave project?
305	Water we learn about water sources management of the water sources to reduce contamination. Then the use of water for both animals and humans. We learn about it and water .... What do you call it ... Water harvesting or some other sources of water. Water harvesting, ponds, boreholes and hand-dug Wells. We learned about all these things and their management.
Shani Haruna:	Thenwhat other thing did you learn apart from the water under the brave project?
305	Yeah, as I've said, we have so much challenges with our farming processes and this we are told, it is the effect of climate change. And, we have been taken round how we should also cope up with this knowledge to cope up with our lives, say using other varieties of crops that can withstand either the short rainy season or the drought or the two when there are floods. We learn about all those things.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So what did you learn about groundwater under the brave project?
305	Groundwater basically is the hand-dug Wells and boreholes. We learned you need to make feasibility studies and know where you can get the water table. Then you also have to management water so that it will remain wholesome for consumption. They did .... The environment must be clean. That is what we've also learned about groundwater.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. we are now coming to talk about access to weather information and how you use it in your farming activities. Yeah. So the first thing we'd like to discuss is, how did you find out information about the weather last season? That's the last season, the previous one before the one that just ended.
305	We get our information from our agric directorate, the district agric office. Then from gmet. Some of us, they have linked us and gmet gives the forecast in our phones.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And besides the gmet and then the agric office, which other sources do you get weather information from?
305	We get it from other farmers ... Co-Farmers. People will observe and they are able to forecast that it could be this or that or that. And that is also another good source. It's not .... We don't neglect it.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And are there other sources apart from the farmers too? Do you have groups or associations where you are a member andyou receive weather information from such groups?
305	Yes. We have those groups. We have a World Vision. We have CARE, we have SEND Ghana. We have a lot of these NGOs. They also interact with us. Those who help us give us funds or other educational help at schools, at the health clinic, we also get information from all these groups.
Shani Haruna:	Then you mentioned that you get weather information from the agric office. How do they send you the information?
305	Yeah, they sent direct. They have field workers and when they come round to meet farmers to advise them on new methods of doing farming they pass these messages?
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Do you also get weather information from the radio?
305	Yes. We get weather information from the radio, but that is scarce because some of us are not always with the radio. So we have weather forecast which comes from the national studio? Yes. We also get information from them.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	So the discussion we've had is about the previous season. So we're now ... We're now going to talk about this past season. With that one too, How did you find out information about the weather in this past season?
305	Yeah. The forecast we get from gmet and other farmers or agric office or whichever, the forecast seemed to be a good percentage right ... A good percentage right. The only slight difference was the last rains. Forecast was that by mid-October rains might have ceased, but it extended up to the end of October. Yes.
Shani Haruna:	So basically it's the same sources that you got the information?
305	Yes.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Sothe information ... The weather information that you got what changes did you do in your farming activities because you got those information? The weather information.
305	Yeah, there are a lot of changes we have adopt due to that information. The planting seasons we had to time a little better than we used to. Then activities involving the whole planting system, harvesting, drying and to what of not. Then change of varieties of crops, like I used to be mainly on guine corn, millet, but I have changed to corn far, far more than the guinea corn or the traditional crops. I have also changed to beans which use not to be my major crop. So we have changed a number of varieties of crops and the time period too I think it's appropriate for us due to the fact that we have all these informations.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. so with regard to the sowing time, what specific changes have you made because you got information about the weather?
305	The sowing time, like I had to stop the millet and guinea corn because compared to previous years, the sowing time ... Those millet and guinea corn had passed. So I had to rather increase my corn.
Shani Haruna:	When were ... Before the information at what time were you doing your sowing?
305	Before the information we used to sow the millet late April up to June. But the recent information we sow the first week of July ... We sow the first week of July. Otherwise the last sowing used to be sixth June. But even getting to the end of June, there were no rains. So you have to adopt to change early variety maturing crops.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So the new varieties that you mentioned, what makes them ... Or why did you have to adopt the new varieties?
305	Because they will use shorter period and that shorter period, with the forecast, there will be moisture within that period. So from early July to late September some of these varieties will mature. The beans and the corn they will mature.
Shani Haruna:	The maize ... The maize varieties on the average, how many days do they take to mature?
305	On the average, the earliest one we have here is 74 days. So I use those ones and some of them are close. We also have seven-five, then those that take 90 days. But I think I use the seventy-four days.
Shani Haruna:	How about the beans? How many days do they take to mature?
305	Yeah, the beans too is just around 65, 67 days and they are mature.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Sothe weather information that you received, in the future, what will be the best way for you to receive that information?
305	The best way, is if radio method, it can be localized. Like, if they enforce our receptions at local level, I think that might be the best way. And then some key farmers maybe could also be made by way of sending it through their phones. They can also spread. At time we learn to do things from somebody who has done it and has succeeded. And so if there are key farmers who they will give them the information direct it also keep them spreading to others.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. are there other ways apart from the ones that you have mentioned?
305	The other ways may be from one another ... The farmers. But as I've said, the farmers need edcuation. I don't know exactly what to say about how farmers can be informed. Maybe farmers too should be orientated by orientation courses so that they will get to know these things. And some of these traditional beliefs maybe will be subtracting and throwing them away.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	Soyou mentioned sometimes you get information from the radio. In your opinion do you think men listen to radio more than women, or women listen to radio more than men?
305	Men listen to radio more than the women.
Shani Haruna:	Why is that so? Why do men listen to radio more than women?
305	I really cannot tell, but more men have radios than women, and the women maybe they are probably more occupied working out in the field than men. And when they are even in the house, doing the household chores, they seem not to have time to attend to the radio.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Then why do men have more radios than women?
305	They're more resourceful than the women. Even if a woman has a property, like say fowls or goats or something like that, the men still control it. Yes. But the women do not have that ... What do you call it ... Reciprocal control. So that is a probably why.
Shani Haruna:	And why is that the case that men control the properties of women, but women can not control the properties of men?
305	From history, men are more physique and can withstand these heavy heavy activities and it cultured right from the start that man is the head of the family. Maybe that too will be that cultural bond.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Then do you also think that men have more phones than women here?
305	It look like it is equal now as far as phones are concerned, because even the young young girlss, they own phones maybe because of the music they can get from it, but not probably better information. So it looked like the women have more phones than men.
Shani Haruna:	And why is that ... Why do women have more phones than men?
305	I think they like the entertainment they get from the phones and well, men seem not to care about this entertainment.
Shani Haruna:	And how often do agric extension visit you to give you information about your farming activities?
305	It's relative. The agric officers, we have an officer for a zone, for some communities. And it is a daily work. The times he will go round and come to you as an individual may depend. Some farmers have got ... When they see that you are involved in some activity of interest, they may frequent you more than the other. So in the season at least, or throughout the year the agric extension officer can see you about 10 times.
Shani Haruna:	How about .... How often do they meet the whole community as a group,
305	That one is not easy to call a whole community, but just smaller groups, they meet them, especially when they are trying ... What they term it ... The trial farms, they meet those people as a group as often as possible. But to call the whole community ... Like you talk of Tariganga here, the community is large. If you call you a whole community group the attendance, you won't appreciate it.
Shani Haruna:	And then the small groups that you mentioned, the trials groups .... Do the extension workers give information about water management in such groups? Do they give information about how to manage your water in such groups?
305	Yes. They do so. They do so. How to manage water and then the other information of the new varieties and current government policies attached to say farming that season, fertilizers supplies, inputs ... Other inputs, they feed the farmers with these information.
Shani Haruna:	Sowhat information do they normally give about water management?
305	When they look at your farm or where the demonstration plot is, they relate it to how you'll put bondings or the way you should plough it, the way you should put bondings or what do you call it ... Barriers to control the flow of rainwater or to retain moisture more effectively. They teach all these things.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And what do they normally tell you about the weather at such meetings?
Speaker 2:	Yeah, just as I've said, they will tell you the weather forecast from the national radio because not many farmers get that weather information from the national radio, and maybe wherever they also get information on the weather they tell you. Then the climate change, they suggest to farmers why they think the change is, and they use that as a basis to tell them why it is also necessary to change their cropping or farming practices.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. then how do you normally get access to the agric extension officers?
305	Of recent it's the phones or else you have to go to the office and give a report to the director. If the field officer is somewhere he will tell the field officer later on that this person has come or this community has sent for you.
Shani Haruna:	And would you be happy to receive information about the weather or water management from the agric extension officers?
305	Oh yeah. It's welcome. We'll happy to receive any message from them. Of course, it must be positive and I don't hope some technical person will come and give you negative messages.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So we are now coming to talk about access to crop information and how you use those information. So what crops do you normally farm?
305	I normally do guinea corn, millett and maize, but of recent, I've added these cowpea just because of the short period of the rains.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So the crops that you mentioned, how did you find out information about them last season?
305	Yes. the information I visited Manga research twice. So we also get information from the research station. Yes.
Shani Haruna:	Apart from Manga, where else do you get information?
305	Yeah, we also .... Our main information is from MoFA. Agric office. Yes.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Then this season too, How did you find information about them?
305	It's normal, the same sources.
Shani Haruna:	And in the future, what would be the best way for you to receive such information?
305	Yeah, the best way is if it is through radio and if the radio enforcement can come at local level, because the national information at times we don't catch it clear. Yeah. The national radio at times we cannot catch it.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. the crops that you mentioned and sources that you said you get those information from, what information do they give you about the crops?
305	Yeah, they tell you the different varieties, their durations and their planting distances and their ... The weedicides for each of these plants. This information, they feed us and maybe the quantity of fertilizer you should apply when it's applicable. Yeah.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. do they tell you something about the water requirements of the crops?
305	Exactly. That is also added. Water requirement of your crop is added and this water requirement, it depends upon ... You have to look at your land so that you don't put a crop that retention of water is high which can disturb it or retention of water is low which could also affect it. They teach us all these things. Yeah.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Sofrom the information that you received from the MoFA, then the agric station the manga research station ... What .... Did you make any changes to your farming activities as a result of you receiving those information?
305	Yes. as for ... We adopt those methods, except that there are difficulties. You cannot follow it strictly 100%. But that is the ... The new information we receive we are adopting it and I think there is improvement on our yields when we compare to some years back.
Shani Haruna:	Then you also mentioned you've been hearing some information about the radio ... From the radio. Did you make any changes as a result of your listening to the radio programs?
305	Yes, all information I have personally used made effective use of them and as I've said, there are also challenges. You cannot adopt the information ... All the information they have given you because when you are to do it, you need to have collaboration from your family members or neighbours and a they may not too understand it or they may look at it to be painful ... To be labourous. Those are the challenges, but I personally, I try to effect the information I gain.
Shani Haruna:	Are you able to give us some specific examples of the changes that you've made?
305	One specific example is, the army fall worms, or how do you call it. They told us when to spray. At first we thought you could just spray on the leaves and ... But they told us that they fall on the ground at dawn or at dusk. So that is the time you should spray and they can die and will not be able to climb the plant or to drop from the branch to the floor. I tried it this season and it was effective or else we use just spray on the leaves and it doesn't make any change. The other issue weedicide and beans. I use the weedicide and the beans and I didn't use the hoe again. It was effective. Yes.
Shani Haruna:	What did you use the weedicide to do?
305	Yeah the weedecide, with the beans, I sprayed the beans farm with only weedicide, we didn't use a hoe or cutlass to remove the weeds.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	So, we're now coming to talk about the well monitoring training and how you used the information. How did you find the well monitoring training that you received?
305	I didn't ... As a coordinator of the community, I invited or I involve in the communities using the well water to cooperate with those who were within the training group. But honestly, I didn't get directly involved in the training.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. then that's fine. So we are now about to talk about gender and then access to information here. In your opinion, do you think men and women have access to different information?
305	Oh yes. Men or women, they have .... What do you mean by different information? They have access to information. Who are those who have more access than who? I would say the men have more access. And alternatively, when the women have the access to that very information they put it effectively than the men.
Shani Haruna:	When you say they put it effectively than man, what does that mean?
305	They will want to adopt and they will want to practice that new information. But the men ... They hardly want to change or the will change after persistence, persistence. Yes.
Shani Haruna:	Then you said men have more information than women. Why is that so?
305	They are more exposed to the outside than the women. The women are much much more within the community or within the house.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And why the men more exposed than the women?
305	It could be cultural background and it is not easy to change the culture like that. It could be from our cultural background.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. then do you also think that men get more information about water than women?
305	About water, yeah, I think ... You know, their information is equal. As far as water is concerned their information is equal. But as I've repeatedly said, the women fetch water and use water more than men. So their attention to water is far, far better than men. Yes.
Shani Haruna:	So what do you think? Men have ... Women have more access to water information than men? Or men have more access to water information than women?
305	As I've said, our traditional practice is that the women go for the water. So their attention to keep the water sources clean, to use the water effectively on health grounds. Yes. I mean because they are more close to using water their attention is there as to water managment and what have you.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So, we're now coming to talk about water use, management and disagreements that results from the use of the water resources here.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So what do you normally use water for?
305	Yeah, we use water basically for drinking, cooking, washing of other things, either clothes or utensils, Or even animals When it becomes necessary. Our sheep we wash them. If you have a horse, you wash it, and what do you call it .... Rural enterprise projects, like soap making, we use water. So basically these are the areas we use water.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And where do you get the water from? Which are the sources?
305	Our sources ... The key source now is borehole. We have dams, then we have ponds or streams. But the key source of late is the boreholes. The streams and the dams, they are now fading out.
Shani Haruna:	Do you use the water for farming activities?
305	Yeah, the dam is where we use it for farming activities. We use for irrigation. The borehole water too we use it for our nurseries. Yes.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So in your use of the water for the activities that you have mentioned, what has allowed you to plan your use of the water better?
305	The plan for the use of the water better ... Yeah the management education we get and the climate change and the rains ... You have to get this information and plan. When are you doing your nursery if you want to use the borehole water or if you are going to do the nursery at the pond, when is there water at the pond? The dictate of our planning is from the climate information ... What do you call it .... The rain fall information.
Shani Haruna:	So how do you use the rainfall information in planning for your stage of the water?
305	It tells ... The forecast tells you when you might have rain and if there is rain at a certain period you expect there may be water in the pond or enough in the dam. That tells you when to do what crop or what activity. Yes.
Shani Haruna:	Okay sir.
Shani Haruna:	So, how has the brave project helped you to manage water better?
305	Yeah. The brave project give us that sort of training direct on the ... Like the radio information, the agric office information, the research center information. The brave projecs has sat with us and it looks like it has reviewed all these things direct. So I think that it have made our adoption to these new methods far, far better.
Shani Haruna:	What did you learn under water management under the brave project?
305	Water management .... Keeping your water source clean, and from the source to the home .. How you should also keep water in the home clean. Yeah. The forecast will also tell you when you will have ... Definitely the focus will also tell you when you should plan and sow because you might be expecting rain, and it also tells us the crop that is necessary for you to sow to match with the raining period. So I think we have learned all of these things.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. the water sources that you mentioned, the boreholes, the wells and then the dams. Do you have people that are responsible for managing those water sources?
305	Yes. You have the immediate community and you have a key person who's the leader of managing that ... What we will call it .... Who precides over let us clean, let us do this or who oversees the day to day cleanness of the source. We have some body.
Shani Haruna:	And is that person part of a group or it's just that person alone?
305	That person is part of the immediate community. So it's a group and that person too can also belong to some of these recent formation of groups. Yes, where we also pass information from brave, from agric to them.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So do you have a committee in charge of managing the boreholes and then the wells and even the dam?
305	We have committees. It's the ponds that do not have committee as such. But the boreholes and the dam ... We have the dam committee. Each borehole has a committee, a management committee.
Shani Haruna:	And how many people are in the committee?
305	Some are up to seven. Some like the dam ... It is even divided into many groups. So you have five ... And all of them taking that stretch of the dam irrigable area. The membership of the committee can be many and be up to 23, 25. But the borehole they are between five and seven.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	And what are the roles of the members? The committee members, what are their positions and what are their roles?
305	Yeah, you have the chairman, you have the secretary, you have the treasurer, you have the organizing secretary or the chief whip. They have it all like that. And some of them have opened accounts. Yes.
Shani Haruna:	So what are the roles of the chairman, the secretary, the organizer, and then the chief whip that you mentioned?
305	The secretary keeps the records, he has the book of registered members who use that source of water daily. Then the treasurer also keeps the book of the accounts. When they make repairs or when they pay the put into the bank. The chairman is the presiding member of the committee. The chairman is one of the two ... One of three who are signarities to the bank account if they have an account at all. But then some of them have bank accounts.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So then how are they selected?
305	They are selected in a community meeting. The district assembly and the community. And they select the management team. Yes.
Shani Haruna:	And what do you consider before selecting the members?
305	Well they consider those who will actively lead the community. And then they select them ... Who they think are patient, have the time. There are some when you give them that position they have no time. They will be ... Maybe always ... Some of them are petty traders .... Always on the road traveling. So they'll consider those who are usually available and will be selfless.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So we're now coming to talk about disagreements on water use. Do you think the water usage results in disagreements? Maybethe use of the boreholes or the Wells and then the dams, does it result in disagreements?
305	Yeah, you have disagreements. There are some who will not want to pay the levies. So they will always have to confront them. But I think usually they are able to settle it. At the dam site,tThey'll open the valves and water will go to some section and will not reach some section. So you hear those groups affected also grumbling and shouting and well usually they are able to resolve them.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So those disagreements, how are they .... How are they normally resolved?
305	They confront the management committees. They confront the management committees. It might be the fact that they have not cleared their gutter or something like that. So the managment committee will be on their feet to organize to rectify whatever be the challenge. Yes.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	How about the disagreements relating to the boreholes? How are they resolved?
305	When they have something like that ... The peak of it, they have to go to the elder. Every community has got an old man or an elder. So when they disagree, they ... Atmos, if they fail to resolve within they will go to the most elderly person in that immediate community using that borehole. And usually, they will have to come to an agreement.
Shani Haruna:	So that elderly person that you mentioned, is it always a man or it can be an elderly woman?
305	Always always a man. He's the landord. Hardly do we have landlords who are landladies here. He's always a man.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. then still on the water management, would you like to involve the local district assembly to help with water management?
305	Yeah, the water management is actually the work of the district assembly. Soall the boreholes, all the dams it is ...., the authority comes from the district assembly. So it is the district assembly who precides in even the formation of these committees through their wings like the environmental site, or they call it what... They have the water outfit in the district assembly.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Thenback to the disagreements. How has the brave helped in improving these disagreements?
305	I think brave hasn't gone direct to these disagreement, but from this skills we have taken into effect, well, it tells us that we should also initiate something ... Yes, to manage our disagreement.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So how are you using the skills that you have acquired in the project to help resolve the disagreements?
305	The skills there is the management attitude. This is attitude really. It's not practical skills. The management attitude, how brave manages these training sessions. And so if you are also in the committee or are even outside the committee and you need to school them to be able to understand one another so they will move forward to face the world challenges.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. thenin terms of water access, what do you think needs to happen so that you can have more access to water?
305	I think thatlike maintenance of these boreholes or even maintenance of the dams, we do not have enough skills. Maybe the district assemblies need to try to continuously give skills to the community members so that .... Like if a boreholeiss broken, we just have to run to the district assembly for an artisan to come and make repairs. And even the spare parts, we don't know where they are. The district assembly buys the spare parts from somewhere. I think there is the need for this improvement and maybe the district assemblies probably need .... Or whichever body that can help is welcome.
Shani Haruna:	So apart from the skills, what other thing do you think should happen so that you can have more access to water?
305	Availability to ... Availability to materials. If like even this community is enjoying the mechanized borehole using the sun power, what do you term it ... Solar power ... The community members do you not have the least skill in this thing. The equipment involved like the tubes or joints, we don't even know where ... If it is spoilt we don't know which market you can go and get it. So I think that or availability of some of these materials should also be, within our markets.
Shani Haruna:	Then how has the brave helped you to increase your income?
305	Yeah, the caution on the climate change and the appropriate crops or activities to our farming practices. Yeah. It has helped a lot and those of us who have adopted this information it has helped us to increase our yields.
Shani Haruna:	Sowhat would you say about your yields if you compare now and then in the past, what is the difference?
305	The difference .... The difference, we cannot dimension it in terms of figures, but different years we used to have we called lean season and many families would have consumed all the yield they had. But now for the past years, we don't talk of lean season again. It looks like almost every family can feed all round the year.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So, is there any other experience or knowledge that you want to share with us apart from the things that we have discussed this morning?
305	Yes. sustenance of our improve yields. We still lack storage .... Skills in storage and facilities of storage. We still lack them. If some of these things can be done. We cannot keep our grains over one year. Supposing we have storage that can keep the grain more than a year. I don't talk of the perishable goods. We can't can our meat. If you kill your fowl and you don't eat it that day and the following day and then it will go bad. So we still need skills on some of these things for sustenance that can be a long period.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Sir, we'll like to say a very big thank you to you for your time and then the knowledge and experiences that you have shared with us. We are very much happy and grateful to you for your time.
305	Oh, thank you. It's appreciated. Thank you very much.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
