Shani Haruna:	This is interview with 310, annon number 002. So we're about to start our discussions. So we'll like you to state your full name, date of birth and whether you are male or female.
310...:	Thank you. I'm 310 from Tariganga community. I was born on 1st September, 1980.
Shani Haruna:	Are you male or female?
310...:	I am female.
Shani Haruna:	And do you hold any position here in the community?
310...:	Yes please.
Shani Haruna:	What's the.... What is it?
310...:	I'm a community monitor. We normally mobilize people in terms of meeting or anything going on in the community. Any information that comes we give it to the community people. I'm also a church secretary, Presby Church.
Shani Haruna:	So that's nice. It's nice knowing you now. So the next thing we would like to know is, we want to know what your understanding of the brave project is. What do you know about the brave project?
310...:	Thank you very much. I think my understanding is that they brave project they came into the community to educate us on farming program. Maybe the new variety or the change of the weather and then how to go about it. Maybe like the rain is not coming well or raining well during the season, so the variety that we'll adopt the season for us. So they came and introduced that one to us so that we go about it and it will help us get more yield at our rainy season.
Shani Haruna:	Besides that what other things were you informed about under the project?
310...:	So many things. Example, like even water harvesting, they also taught us about water harvesting and then dry season gardening too and then how to prepare compost or insecticide with nim trees.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. What did they say about groundwater?
310...:	The groundwater. Okay.Thank you. The groundwater, what they brief us about concerning our water is maybe how to go about it to protect it, to make it clean so that we'll use it better in life. And also the groundwater how to maybe harvest water and other thing to help sustain our animals in dry season. So we have so many dug-outs here and that one we mobilize community members to dig that one which will you help our animals to get more water. Even we have boreholes here too and due to the community mobilization and through their education too it has help us get more boreholes through World Vision too, to add into our boreholes.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So, we're now going to talk about access to weather information and how you use it. For the last season, the last farming season, how did you find out information about the weather? The last two seasons before last year. How did you find out about the weather last season?
310...:	Okay, thank you. Through the brave project we do have meeting with them and sometime they brief us concerning the weather forecast and also we hear information from Quality FM, Sun Shine and other FMs. So sometime, agric people they do go to Quality FM to talk about the season, how it will come, how to start it, the time and the date, and the rain that will come first time if it's necessary for us to start sowing, they will brief us concerning that. So we do listen through that. And also we have a Community Information Center. So sometime we do connect to Quality FM so that those who doesn't have a radios in their house to listen they do come to the market and sometimes, if their house are not far they do sit in the house and also listen through that. So sometime it has helped us a lot in this community because we do listen to that one and it serves as a guideline for us to proceed on our farm during rainy seasons.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Then you mentioned that... Apart from those sources apart from the radio and, then the agric officers, which other sources or which other source do you get weather information from?
310...:	That is what I last mentioned it, like the brave project too. They came to introduce those things to us. So they alert us, and through that that we always listen to the FM and also, URA radio because they always come to us, whatever we say they also bring agric officers for us so that whatever we say about it or we list our problems, what we knew and what we doesn't know after that they ask the agric officer to also talk about it. So there that we get more information on concerning on our farm, on our farm so that during raining season we do pass.... The brave people help us to get more information through the agric officers.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. so the radios you mentioned... The radio sets, who owns the radio sets in the particular household, like in a particular household who, who owns a radio set in the house? Is it the man or the woman?
310...:	Mostly in this community it's the men, they are dominating. But the woman too also owns it. Because the information that we always listen is important to us. So everybody wants to listen. So if you're in the house and your husband doesn't have it and you have your money, you can also go and buy it so that it'll help you get more information. So both men and women are also having the radios but men are dominating.
Shani Haruna:	So why is it that men dominate having the radio sets?
310...:	You know, like a community like this, it's like the illiteracy is higher. So mostly the men, they are the landlord. So they used to buy it. But now through this CARE program and other things, it has helped us a lot. So they have made the women to be aware that whatever men can do women too can also do it. So everybody is now struggling, so that if you are a woman maybe evening time you are about to go and sleep, the man will not leave the radio for you because of the children. Maybe they may spoil it. So due to that, the man will send it inside his room and what you wanted to hear you will not get it. The radio is not there. You will not get it. So due to that, it has helped make the women also try to buy on their own radio. So anytime you want to listen to it, you on it, use it, and any time you want you also off it.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. That's nice. So apart from the brave and then the radio stations, do you have other groups here where you can get information about the weather from those groups or associations? The weather information.
310...:	Okay. We have like VSLA groups, we have those groups in this community and World Vision too have organized some groups like that. So every week we do meet to contribute some money. So there that, after that maybe we can chat concerning the season, or information that is around within us we do get it from there and even the market square too.
Shani Haruna:	So that was the discussion around last season where you got your weather information from. So now, we would like to know how... How did you find out information about the weather this season? The season that just ended, how did you get or where did you get information about the weather from?
310...:	First is the brave program because we are still on it. And always they have been coming to educate us on the season, because all the time they do come at least two months or three down or three months or some time getting into the raining season, they will come so that they will educate us on the season that is coming; what to do and what, how the preparation that we should prepare towards the season. We do get the information from them and also all the time they do play it in URA radio for us to hear and then the Agric or the MoFA people also talk to us how to go about it. So I think that's where we get more information.
Shani Haruna:	And apart from the brave or the radio are there government agencies that send you information about the weather?
310...:	No please, we don't have. But about five years ago, CARE people came here and they did that and they do organize some people. They even brought weather forecast men from Accra. So sometimes they do organize a meeting for us so that they will come and talk about it for us to know how the season is coming on, whether it will rain more or less to how the preparation that we should prepare towards it. There that they do advise us the variety that we should sow so that it will help us because the rain, sometime it wouldn't rain up to the month that we want. So due to that, we have to sow the better varieties which will help us get more yield.
Shani Haruna:	And if you say better varieties, what do you mean by that?
310...:	We have like the olden days, the variety that they were using, that one, it will take a long period before it yield. But this one, if the old one would take three months, this one will take maybe two months or two and half. That is why. And we have those varieties in Agric station. And then Manga SARI, they are producing the new varieties and it's also good. So, sometimes we do go there because due to their advice we have tried it and we have seen that it's working.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So I've had some people say they've sometimes they get some weather information from gmet. Have you ever received weather information from Gmet either in the form of text or call?
310...:	As for me, no. But they came to the community, they picked our numbers, they wrote our names, including our numbers and they told us when they go back we will be receiving information concerning the weather. But as for me I didn't get it, but most people had it, that they do text them.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So you mentioned you've been receiving weather information from the brave project and then the radio programs. Now we would like to know, what changes have you made in your farming activities as a result of you getting the weather information?
310...:	Okay, thank you. The changes are many because as at now we are always using the new variety. The old one, we are not using them anymore. So we have stopped using them and through their advice every year you have to buy the new variety of crops to sow, specially maize, soybeans and other crops. So sometime we do sow late because here you will not get the cow for them to plough for you faster. The men have to finish ploughing theirs before they go for the women's own. So if you mean to sow the olden days or our local ones, you will not get anything, you end up getting nothing. So for me, I always go to a agric station to buy the new variety of maize and the other crops to come and sow. Even sometime if I sow, maybe late, at least I will get something. So I've seen so many changes in them and even especially the compost and then the insecticide. You know the nim tree, if you use that one it's not harmful and it's even easy to come by them and the materials are within us, you get them here without buying. And even if you buy, it's not costly. Maybe one cedi or two cedi, it's not costly. So I think that one too is good. It has helped us a lot. So as for me, these changes have helped me and I will always do that.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Thenwhat changes have you made in your livestock rearing? Or you don't rear livestock?
310...:	I rear, but just recently that I started because where I was, we were in the family house and the people are many there and you know in a family house it's not easy for a woman to rear. But now that we have moved here, I've started doing something.
Shani Haruna:	So what's... How have you applied the information in your livestock rearing? Even though you just started how has the information helped you?
310...:	Thank you. They advice us to get, maybe after harvesting your crops, you gather the waste for your animals, you don't throw them away or you don't leave them like that. So I've gathered so many of them. If we enter here, you will see them, they're there. So that maybe dry season in like this a time will come that the animals will not get food outside to eat. So that time that I use to fetch that one to give it to them.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Still discussing about the weather and access to weather information. So in the future, what would be the best way for you to receive information about the weather? What do you think will work best for you if they were to send you weather information?
310...:	I think through phones will be better. And also the radio stations.
Shani Haruna:	Which other means will be good again?
310...:	Okay. Even the community meetings. If we get information in the community meetings I think that one too is good, or the community leaders. If you get to the community leaders, they will also mobilize the community meeting to inform the whole community on it.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. In your opinion, do you think that men have more phones than women in the community?
310...:	Yes, please.
Shani Haruna:	Why is that so?
310...:	Most people, it's not easy in the community here. Though the education is now high but still it's not easy because those who doesn't have work and especially the farmers, to get money to buy phone is not easy unless the child or somebody give it to her. But the men, they force to get it because they are always, they always farm and the women are supporting them, so they have access to do whatever they want. If they harvest they can say sell this thing for me, or they have or they are rearing. They can sell their cow or the goat or sheep and even the fowls, they 're there. But woman doesn't rear much here because you are not owning it. Even if you are rearing it's for your husband, you can't go and catch it and sell that oh I need money to buy this. You can't do that. That is why men are having more phones than woman.
Shani Haruna:	You mentioned that the women only support their husbands in the farms. Will you be able to explain that in detail for me?
310...:	The man is the landlord. So they're using their powers. He would say that, I brought you in the house so you have to follow me, do whatever I want. You can't do whatever you want. But we thank God that through these educations and the brave project, it has changed some of them because looking at olden time woman you don't have access to even farm. To get farm self it's not easy, to get a land and farm. But now the men have released their land for the women to also do something to support them, but first it wasn't like that. As a woman you don't have access to do anything. You are only supporting your husband. That is why I'm saying that, though changes have come but it's still there. Not everybody who have changed, some are still there who haven't changed and they expect the woman to follow him to do whatever he wants. After harvest he will fetch for you; You take this, prepare food for us to eat. If it finished, the woman have to alert the man to give the food they again. That is how they are doing here.
Shani Haruna:	What do you think can be done to change the situation?
310...:	I think through this information the brave program, the information that we are getting from the FMs, the community meetings and the leaders in the communities, I think some people have changed. So others should also learn from those who have changed. And I think after maybe playing these programs or educating us on these things, the more that they hear, I think the more that they will also change.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So, the other issue we would like to ask about is the visit of extension officers here. How often do extension officers visit here?
310...:	Even a year, maybe twice. And we've complained so many times to them and what they are saying is that they are not many, that is why it's like that. And even our animals, if they are sick and you need them to come and inject self it's problem. How to get them..... So sometime we talk to them to maybe also train some people in the community. So in terms of that we can get them faster for them to help and they're saying, yes, they will do that. But we haven't seen it, but thanks to God, we have one or two people in the community here, they are doing that. So sometime we do call them. If you have your money you can buy your drugs for them. So any time you want the injection, you contact them to come and inject for you so that you also pay them some small token.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So those people that you mentioned are they trained by the MoFA?
310...:	I don't think. It's only one person that I know that maybe trained, but I haven't consulted him to know much about whether he went and trained for himself or it's the MoFA puppy people who helped him.
Shani Haruna:	So when the agric extension officers, they visit, do they provide you information about water management and the weather?
310...:	Yes, they do provide us. They do inform us how the weather have changed. The changes that have come. We should also change and follow the way the weather is.
Shani Haruna:	And what do they tell you about how to manage your water?
310...:	Now? We have, we are in dry season garden. So they do inform us so that we should dig a small this thing, dug-out, we should do small dug-out so that anytime the water come, it will last for us to use it on our dry season gardens. Because at this time, we are on onion and vegetables seasons. So during raining season we should, eh, they also taught us water harvesting, how to get more polytanks or containers that will store water for us. But here we don't have those things, because the polytanks, the money, how to get them it's not easy. But we are having a dam here. So what we normally do is that we go to...., They will open it for it to come. So you can also get someone, maybe two or three people to help you dig your own well small so that the water will come, you will be using it for some time. So by the time that it will finish, they will open it again for you.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. How do you normally get access to the agric officers? In the absence of the brave project, how did you access the agric officers?
310...:	We have some of their numbers and so sometimes we do call them, and also through Care they came into them and they also brought them into this community. So through that we know them much. We know most of them. So anything at all, if you call them or we go there, we go to agric station, it's easy for us to get them and even the MoFA people. As at now we are into contact with them, so anytime we need anything we should come, We shouldn't hesitate.
Shani Haruna:	Okay, that's nice. So now we're now going to talk about access to crop information and how you used those information. So for your farming last season, how did you find out information about your crops?
310...:	Okay, the crops, we have more information. That is why I said earlier that we get information from radio station, the brave people, the mofa and the agric and we do get information from them, and we even have one person in the community here. He's now working with agric station. So any information that comes sometimes he do bring it to us.
Shani Haruna:	So how about this season, how did you find out information?
310...:	It's through the brave project and then agric station, radio stations; through that and sometime community meetings. That's where we get information. Even in the churches too, any information that comes, sometimes they do announce it in the churches for us to hear. And then the market square too.
Shani Haruna:	So what happens.... In a community in meeting what normally happens?
310...:	They do mobilize. The people will come together so they brief us on the season that is coming and how we should prepare ourselves towards the season, whether it would rain heavily or not. Maybe sometime they do predict that this year looking at the way the wind is blowing, we will get more rain or looking at the way it is this year we will not get more rain. So maybe from this time to this time, if we get rain, everybody have to start sowing. So through that each and everyone will bring his or her view to that.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Then, in terms of such information and the various methods or sources that you have mentioned, what would be the best way for you to receive such information in the future?
310...:	From the weather people.
Shani Haruna:	Information about the farming activities?
310...:	The agric people and then mofa people too. They are together. They're working together. So always we get information from these people and then also get from these people. So I think in future if they continue with their work, it'll help us.
Shani Haruna:	When you say agric and the mofa people, are they two different groups of people?
310...:	Yes, please. Yes. They are two different people and they are working together too.
Shani Haruna:	Who are the agric people and who are mofa people?
310...:	The agric people I think they're into the farming. Maybe the variety of crops, the crops that we should sow and then crop that we shouldn't sow. So they always advise us to use the new variety of crops. So they will bring it for us to buy and sow. So always they advise us to get the new variety of crops. And after that too, they will also buy some of them like sorghum, soybeans and other things. They also.... They are weighing them. So mostly if yours are many, I think if you send to their place, I think that one would be better than sending it to the market women for them to buy. And the mofa people too, they also help us in our livestock and then the fertilizer that we should use, they advice. They also advise how to use their fertilizers too. That's what I know about them. I think the agric people, they are in an institution by Presby Agric Station and then the mofa they're under government, they are from government.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. That's nice. So from the information that they brought to you what changes did you make to farming activities?
310...:	Okay. The changes is that now I've got access to get more land to farm as the quantity that I want. Though it's not free. Maybe you get something small for the person. Sometime you buy one fertilizer bag for the person so that he will also release the land for you to farm. So I have extended my farm due to their advice that I have been following. It has helped me get more yield every year. So I used to.... As at now I'm into it and I'm even farming more. At first I don't farm. But now I think the farming helped me a lot because I will not buy food. First I will not buy food. The food is already there. It's left with the maybe petty petty things that I may need it. And sometime I do fetch it, sell it and buy whatever I want and even help in our children's school fees and other things too.
Shani Haruna:	You mentioned you farm what are the crops that you farm?
310...:	That's maize and then soybeans, and then dry season gardening too onions and vegetables.
Shani Haruna:	What kind of vegetables do you grow?
310...:	"Aleefi", "ayoyo" And then we have some other ones I don't know the name of it; the "bittor" and then the "berigise", that's how we call it in our local dialect.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So we're now coming to talk about well monitoring. How did you find the weld monitoring training that you received? Did you take part in a training on well monitoring?
310...:	No, please. I didn't.
Shani Haruna:	You didn't take part in a training on well monitoring?
310...:	No. I don't know of this year, but maybe some years back, about five years back, Care people did that. It's a long time.
Shani Haruna:	What did they teach you about?
310...:	They teach us about how to sow the crops. I think I didn't do that. I didn't take part on that one. Yes. And I didn't take part in the training on the well monitoring.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So we're now coming to talk about how men and women have access to information here. So in your opinion do you think that men and women have access to different information?
310...:	Yes, please.
Shani Haruna:	How?
310...:	Yeah. Sometimes men do meet together, have their information, maybe chat on whatever they want and women to also meet at their group too. So sometimes we have a group that all of us can come together and meet and sometimes we do have a group that only men and only women who are into that group. That is why I said they have different information.
Shani Haruna:	So what kind of information do men have and what kind of information do women have differently?
310...:	Yeah. Thank you. Sometimes in the community, maybe community meeting, if the chief is having any information he do call the men to brief them. They should.... They don't add women there. And if you a woman you can't go there, if you are not invited you can't go there. And sometimes too, we have some meeting that they do call women to inform them, but to come together sometime maybe if they are having a maybe assemblyman or any other party there that we do come together or weather information, a community meeting that we do come together. But in terms in the community well or moving forward, they have to sit with the leaders of the community or men in the community before it comes up to reach the women.
Shani Haruna:	And why do they have to sit with the men first before they will now come inform the women about the information later?
310...:	Okay. As for that one I don't know, but looking at some years back, at first, women, they don't value women in the community like that. Because first, anything that is happening in the community, women are not part. Just now that they have started adding women into any meetings. But first it wasn't like that. So those things are still there. Though changes have come, but it's still there. Not everybody who have changed, but I think gradually it will totally change.
Shani Haruna:	So do men get more information about water than women?
310...:	Yes.
Shani Haruna:	Why do you think so?
310...:	It's true. Because if anything they do call men first to inform them. They will come out to also inform their wives or after they have finished deciding there that they will come out to inform the women. Because like the dam that we are having here, any time they're having information sometime they do call the men to decide whatever they are going to do before they are also reach to the women because men are having more ..., they are farming more than the women or they are having access to land than the women. I think that is why.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And do you think that the fact that men get more information about water than woman, does that affect the relationships between men and women?
310...:	Yes. It affects.
Shani Haruna:	How does it affect?
310...:	Because as at now everybody is a farmer and what men can do, women too can do better, to my belief. So I think if there's any decision they should involve the women. Maybe our decision too can help us move forward because we are having children. So we know much about a relationship between human beings. I think we have that more than men, because men they always get up, go out, do whatever they want or go to their farm. But as for the woman you will be in the house, study everything in the house with the children. You will know much about human being than men. But their concern is that..., as for women they don't value us, but sometimes we also have more decision than men. Looking at now changes have come. Those who are famine in the community here the woman, some of them get more yield than the men because any information that they hear, they put into practice but men, they are not easy to convince. But we women, we are easy to convince. That is why I'm saying that we are equal. So sometimes they should give us chance to also bring our views.
Shani Haruna:	So we're now coming to talk about water usage, management and disagreements that results from such usage. Okay. Sowhat do you think has allowed you to plan your water usage better?
310...:	Okay. Thank you. The way I manage my water in the house and then in the farm, I have more containers. Sometime if the water comes, we do feel them and be using it gradually, after it finished we then go and fetch it. We don't misuse to fetch today tomorrow you fetch small small. We don't do that. Always fetch more so that it will take you three, four days before you go and fetch it again, and even if you want to do washing, we do wash weekly. Maybe Saturday morning we just fetch it once wash our things and keep it for the next week again. That is how I'm doing it in the house.
Shani Haruna:	How about the farm? What has helped you to manage your water use better in the farm?
310...:	At farm, first we didn't know that we have to maybe dig our wells small for the water to come. So sometime they will open it, you just water your things maybe two days, three days the water has finished again and you be sitting down waiting for the people to open the dam for you to get more water. But now this changes have come so they have educate us how to reserve your water. So we do organize dig the well so that if the water come inside it will last sometime for a week for you to be watering on your cross. By the time that you will be thinking that it will finish, the water will come again. So always you will have water, you will not have problem on water.
Shani Haruna:	So how has the brave project helped you to manage your water better?
310...:	Thank you. At first we didn't know that you have to buy more containers or fill your water, reserve it. All the time we just fetch it, use it and leave it like that. The next day, even uncovered, it will spoil, you have to go and fetch another one. But through their education, it has helped us to know how to manage water in the house. We will have to buy a nice containers with covers. When the water comes, you just fill them. And even raining seasons we have to fill. We do harvest the raining water, fill our containers, keep it and be using it small small for some time, so that may be by a week it'll finish and you then go for another one. So the same way that we are doing. If the boreholes are there we just go and fetch it, keep it find a day or a time, fill everything in the house and be using it small, small. By the time it'll finish, you also get time to go and fill it again. So anytime you are out and you are in, you don't have problem with water.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. You mentioned boreholes and then wells. Do you have organizations that are responsible for managing them here?
310...:	We have a community leaders. They have choose some people to look after it and they are taking care of them. We have some people who are the.... They have been chosen by the community people to care of it.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. How many are those people? How many are they?
310...:	I think they are five. Those I know are five.
Shani Haruna:	And what do they do?
310...:	They always monitor. Every morning they will go to the borehole to check and then make the place clean. They wash it, make it clean so that if it's not clean, sometime the first people that will come, they ask them to clean it before they fetch the water. And sometime every month too we do contribute something to keep, in terms of any problem they use that money to maintenance the boreholes.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So how did they choose those people?
310...:	The community leaders came together to choose those people. And then after that they call a community meeting and introduce the people to the community people that these people are in charge of it. So in terms of anything we should contact them. And those who are building houses and they want water, they will go to them, they will charge them to pay this amount. And even the community as a household they have a specific amount that everybody have to pay per month or a year, sometimes a year for us to pay so that they will keep that money in the bank. They even ask them to open bank account and be keeping that money inside there so that anytime we are facing problem on our boreholes or wells they will just go and withdraw that money to maintenance them, and they have even trained some of them. As for minor ones they can do it for us.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And then how has the brave project helped you to increase your income?
310...:	Okay. Thank you. The brave people have helped us. They always advise us to do more farming and then the dry season, they way we should do it, so through that it has helped us. And even our livestock, how to rear. So through that we get more money and more income from it because after you harvest your maize your soybean, your animals are there. So it has a time if the year is coming to end and then, and we are getting to a rain season time, maybe the meals are there, you have ate and you know that oh this one that I have left it will even end me to another year. So due to that let me quickly sell this to support myself. So sometimes that is how we are doing and then the soyabean and other things, the intercropping - they introduced to us and we did that and it has help us. So we do use them to sell it to support our children in school.
310...:	In terms of health sector, if the child is sick, you yourself, I think that one you don't have problem to go outside to beg for somebody to help you. Now that you have those things you just sell some of them, go and solve your problem. And we are into VSLA groups too and that one too, we contribute every week. So if you're having any problem, you can go in weekly to borrow that money. In terms of major emergency side, you borrow that money use to help yourself solve the problem that you have. Maybe after a month or two months time you make your ways to then pay back and pay some small interest to it. So it's through their effort that it has help us get more money or get more income.
Shani Haruna:	Then would you say that water usage here sometimes results in disagreements?
310...:	Yes we do have disagreement, especially the dams. Sometime we may need the water and they will not open it. Maybe they will ask us to pay this amount. Some will pay some will not pay. So due to those who haven't paid, sometime they will not open it. Even if they open it, those who are nearby the dam, they will block it and leave it the water to get more into their wells so that they will be using it. They will not leave it to come far due to those who haven't paid. So they will do that and your crops will get dry. So due to that it sometimes create problems for us.
Shani Haruna:	How about the boreholes what disagreements are usually reported or have you experienced?
310...:	As compared to last year, the boreholes we were having.... In the market here we were having one borehole here. So those who are using it are many. So we do go this one will say I came first and this person will say I came first. Due to that they will be quarrelling each other and somebody will bring two cans; you want to fill it before somebody will fetch. So sometimes I will say that I came and queued. Now is my turn for me to fetch. You want to fetch two, keep the other one here, send the other one home and come and pick it. Why won't you fetch one, send it and come back. By the time you will be back somebody too have fetch, maybe two, three people have fetch and you fetch it again. So sometime they are in agreement with that one too. But we thank God, World Vision came into our aid and last year, so they help us with a mechanised borehole in the the clinic here. And then they brought it in the market square here and they extend it to another house down there and then another house down there. So now we don't have problem on that one. So if you come and they haven't opened this one, the market one, we just go to the old borehole fetch it. For now, this year we haven't encountered any problem in 2020.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And then how has that brave helped in improving or resolving some of those disagreements that you used to experience?
310...:	Come again.
Shani Haruna:	So how has that a brave helped in resolving or improving these disagreements?
310...:	Thank you. They, the brave people help us to improve disagreement because they taught us how to maybe to make your own dug-out or come together as a group, make your dug-out, which will help you get more water for your animals and for your crops. So I think what they have helped us is that, and we did that too and it has help us. So now if they open the dam, the water will be there more. You will use it, animals will come and drink it and it will be there, last for a week and sometimes even more than that. And they will open. Sometimes they open it three days, three days. But the time we didn't know how to manage it they will open it three days, in the next two days it has finished. How to get water and water your things and animals to get self is not easy. The animals have to travel far but due to their education it has help us. So now we don't have problem with that one. Individual will do your own small one dug-out so that the water will be in more, it'll last for you to be using it without encountering any problem with anybody.
Shani Haruna:	Would you like to invest in digging your own well?
310...:	Yes please. I think I would like to do that.
Shani Haruna:	And what would you use it for?
310...:	I'll use it in watering my this thing. In the household... I will use it in the household like preparing food, washing and other things. And I have plant some mangoes and other trees here, so I'll use some to water them.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Then why would you want to invest in your own? Well,
310...:	I think that one will help me. If I get my own well, I don't have problem with anybody. Anytime and whenever you want, you just go and fetch it, you will not have any problem with anybody. And the way you will make it neatly or nicely, as a community one you not get it in that way; You'll clean it nicely somebody will come, step on any faeces or animal faeces, come and stand on that and due to that it's not safe at all. But if you get your own well, you can make it clean, cover it well. Then the way you would be using it, it will not be like the way the public one people are using it. That is why I want to have my own well.
Shani Haruna:	In your opinion, what needs to happen to improve more water access and management here?
310...:	Okay. What I will do is that...
Shani Haruna:	So what needs to happen to improve water access and management?
310...:	Okay. In the community here, now politicians are coming because 2020, we'll be having vote. So MPs Ministers, assembly members are coming in the community. So sometime we do have a community meeting, list our problems - what we want, our needs. So we list them. So anytime they come we give it to them, so that we need this area, need water, this area, need water, this area need this, so that if you can help us then we vote for you. So sometimes we will do that or we will inform them. And because they need our thump, they will definitely help us. And we did that to previous years so now they are digging a toilet here for us. The MP is doing that. So I think if we continue with those things, I think we would get more water. By 2025 the whole community will be surrounded by water and we will not have any problem. Like even the World Vision have even come out to support the community. So there's a mechanised borehole. So if you need it in your house, if you have any small money, they will help you pull it for you.
Shani Haruna:	So apart from maybe the MPs or World Vision, what can you as a people do to have more water on your own?
310...:	We come together and the community, those areas who doesn't have, we can even come together, contribute something to help dig borehole or a well for that area because previous years that is how we normally do when water, weren't there, we have to come together, contribute, use our own strength to dig the well.
Shani Haruna:	So thanks so much for your time and the experiences that you have shared with us. We are most grateful to for your time and then the knowledge that you have shared with us.
310...:	You're most Welcome. Thank you very much too for your support and what the brave people are helping in the community. So what I will say is that we thank you and God bless you, and we are always around. So in terms of anything, you come to us, whatever we also have, we'll give it to you. Thank you very much.
