Shani Haruna:	This interview is with 401, anon number 008.
Translator:	I'm Sahadatu Mahama, a translator from 401 to Mr Shani.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	We'd like you to state your full name, your date of birth and whether you are male or female.
Translator:	I am 401, 48 years old and I'm a man.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Do you hold any community position?
Translator:	He's a council of champion imam. He represents imam in council of champion and he's organize in health volunteer committee.
Shani Haruna:	So okay. So now we would like him to explain what his understanding of that brave project is.
Translator:	My understanding in brave project is that we are learning .... We're learning about farm activities like farming, how to farm to get good yield or how to rear things. As now .... As previous what we are doing, we should change to this time around farming. I understand that we should change our farming activities. As we were doing in the past.
Shani Haruna:	And what did you learn about water under the brave project?
Translator:	My .... I've learned about water in brave project on harvesting .... Water harvesting ... Rainwater harvesting. I have learned how to harvest rainwater and it will .... And the management of it, how to keep it clean, how to use it, and my work at both house and farm activities.
Shani Haruna:	What did you learn about groundwater, the water that comes into the boreholes and Wells, that you fetch.
Translator:	We have boreholes and wells. But now .... As at now we are using the wells because we have broken down boreholes and the wells too we have lids in which we fetch and close for safety and clean water for drinking and bathing.
Shani Haruna:	So what did you learn about the wells and then the boreholes in the brave project?
Translator:	What I've learned is whenever we are able to repair our borehole, we should have somebody to be there as a security to look after the boreholes in the community. We shouldn't leave it as how it is.
Shani Haruna:	So we're coming to talk about the weather information and how you use it. How did you find out information about the weather last season?
Translator:	I've heard the information weather information that the period that the rain will start the month and the month that it will stop, it will end.
Shani Haruna:	When did they say the rain will start and when did they say it will stop?
Translator:	They say it will start at April and end at October. And that was how it done for the year.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And did it match with what he was expecting?
Translator:	Yes, it was done by what he was expecting.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And where did he hear that information about the weather from?
Translator:	Agric extension officers came to this community and I heard it from them.
Shani Haruna:	Apart from the .... Apart from the agric extension officers, which other sources did he hear weather information from?
Translator:	I heard it from the community monitors who are recording the rain gauge and Tamale Zaa radio station.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Then, how did the extension .... The agric extension officer, how did he get the information to him?
Translator:	He came for a community .... And gathered the community members and just informed them. He came because of that and just informed the community people, and he was part of that meeting.
Shani Haruna:	And what information did he give them about water management and the weather?
Translator:	As he talked about the management, he says we shouldn't contaminate the water, the stream water by putting DDT in that water, or fencing. We should fence our hand-dug wells, which we dig in our farms for drinking or for our farm activities and where .... The valleys that we have fishes people, the cattle used to drink from that valleys .... That ponds .... But the children went to put it .... Convey it away for fish. We shouldn't let children go and do that so that we will manage it for our cattle.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Then how did you hear about the .... How did you find out information about the weather this season?
Translator:	I heard the information on weather that there will be heavy rainfall this year and I heard the onset of the rain of this year and apart from the heavy rainfall we should .... We have the period that it will take for this year.
Shani Haruna:	When .... Which month did they say the rains will start and which month did they say it will end?
Translator:	The onset date was April ... Month was April and the say it will end early first week of November, but it was second or third week of November that it ends because it was above what they said. So it was said by gmet people at brave project meeting.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And when you heard the weather information, what did you use it for?
Translator:	Because it was said that the rain will prolong the time we have to .... We would have plant or sowed our bungu, we didn't sow that time. We wait for the next month and sowed and upon all that, because it rains over, the bungu too have done what ever it is going to do.
Shani Haruna:	So originally, which month were you going to sow the bungu?
Translator:	By October going to November so that by December you would have finished harvesting and .... But up to now, some are still working with them ... In them.
Shani Haruna:	Apart from the bungu, which other crops do you farm?
Translator:	So because of this information of heavy rainfall he went and bought wandata andcultivate late maize .... Cultivated late maize.
Shani Haruna:	Apart from the varieties, which other activities in the maize cultivation did he change because he heard weather information?
Translator:	I cultivated maize and millet first and later on I ... Because of the heavy rainfall I heard the information that I've cultivated the late maizee and the bungu.
Shani Haruna:	In which month did you sow the maize?
Translator:	I cultivated the maize in June, early June.
Shani Haruna:	And originally were you intending to sow in June you wanted to sow earlier than June?
Translator:	It was difficult for me to had .... Lack of tractor services that .... It was lack of the tractor services that I sowed it on June, but I wanted to sow on May.
Shani Haruna:	So, did the weather information you heard ..... Did it help you to make a decision on when to plant your crops?
Translator:	Yes, it's helped me to prepare when .... To decide when to plant, to plow my farm.
Shani Haruna:	So how did it help you?
Translator:	When we were not hearing the information, weather information, we used to plant ... To sow our farms or to plough our farms whenever we ...., even February if it rains we will go and plough or sow ... March, we will go and do that. But since we have been hearing weather forecast and gmet people are telling us the onset days and what and what, we use to follow that onset days and plant on April going. So that helps us. That's why I heard it and I took it to practice and it helped me a lot.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So in the future, what is the best way for you to receive weather information?
Translator:	I would have prefer if brave project would've been coming with gmet people in this community at Jawani, I would have preferred that than not heareing it, but if not that I would like to be hearing it from radio stations.
Shani Haruna:	Which induce station?
New Speaker:	I would prefer hearing the information from Nobel radio or Tizaa radio, Eagle FM and the community rain gauge recorders ... From the community rain gauge recorders and Zaa radio from Tamale. The specific one is Nobel radio or Tizaa radio.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So, men and women who listen to radio more than the other?
Translator:	Women who are interested in listenng for radio discussions listen it more .... Have the information more than men because men used to operate it and just went away. He will do it and go out and leave it hanging in the yard talking. So women, if you are concentrating in that ... You are interested in radio discussions you listen more than the man. So women are listening more than the men.
Shani Haruna:	And do men have more phones than women?
Translator:	Women have more phones than men because we have .... The reason why women have phoness more than men are .... Most of the women are holding the phones because of the musics and films .... Viewing musics films in their phones. That's why they ..... Especially the youth girls ....they used to buy phones for music and film.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And what information do agric extension officers give about water management?
Translator:	That we shouldn't contaminate our water with poison. We shouldn't let children convey the water from pond for fishing. We shouldn't ... We should fence our drinking hand-dug wells in the farms, and we should have bonding and Tie ridging in their farms to manage the this thing .... Moisture conservation, and they should do ploughing across slope and they should level the plough land before sowing.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	The crops that you grow, how did you find out information about them last season and this season?
Translator:	I had the information from agric office and radio stations.
Shani Haruna:	And in the future, what would be the best way for you to receive such information?
Translator:	If the agric people or gmet people would have come to our community and give us the information, should've been better than hearing it from radio stations or another districts.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	So the informations you have been hearing on the radio, what changed did you use it to make in your livestock rearing or livestock activities?
Translator:	For the hens he used to get a veterinary officer to come and immunize them when the this thing ... Harmattan has not yet in. Otherwise, for the past years he didn't know about that so when harmattan comes it clears all the this thing ... Farm birds like cocks and hens. But so far as brave projects have educated us on how to change our livelihood activities He decided to get a veterinary officer early for him to immunize them before the harmattan comes.
Shani Haruna:	So apart from the immunization, what are other changes has he made?
Translator:	I used to just leave them outside and be saying this is my hen, this is my cock. But now I guide them inside the yard and if not in the morning I'll not open, and if I open then I will find Millet or corn for them to eat.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So how did you find the well monitoring training that you received?
Translator:	I trained .... I took the train on monitoring of the borehole and it was to measure the borehole and see whether the level of the water in the borehole, whether it is going down or coming up and the time that it is up and the time that it goes down.
Shani Haruna:	So when you measured the water level, what did you use that information to do? How did you use that information?
Translator:	I didn't understand the measurement ..... The details of the measurement so I couldn't use it to inform or to do any activity for my own.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	Do you think men and women have access to different information?
Translator:	Yes, they have different informations because if it is men's side, men have their information more than women. And if it is, the information is from the women's side, women have more information than men.
Shani Haruna:	So what kind of information normally concerns men and what kind of information also concerns only women?
Translator:	Both men have their information different and women have their information different. Because if it is funerals side, women have more .... They are more people there .... Outdooring and wedding ..... Women are more there and they have their information there. And if it is farming side, men are more and men have their information from that place. So men have farming side information and women have funerals and .... Because they cook there. So they have more information. They gather than men there.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And do men get more information about water than women?
Translator:	Women have more water information than men because women used to fetch water. If it is from the well, they know that this well water is still there or is finishing. And if it is the stream water women fetch stream water and they know this water is good or this water has contaminated. So that's why women have more information about water than men.
Shani Haruna:	So why don't men have more information about water?
Translator:	Because women fetch water and they have the use more than the men.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	And why are men not ... Why do men not fetch water?
Translator:	Men are not fetching water because they bring the woman from their house to his house and the woman is responsible to fetch water for the man. So they used to go and fetch the water. That's the responsibility for the woman to fetch water for the man.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	So we're now coming to talk about water use, management and disagreements. What do you normally use water for?
Translator:	We have water .... We use water for Bathing, cooking, drinking, washing, for animals drinking and building and plastering.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So how has the brave helped you to manage your water better?
Translator:	They've helped us by giving .... By building our capacity on managing or harvesting water and keep it safe for our human consumption.
Shani Haruna:	What about the water on your farm? How has the project helped you to manage water on your farms?
Translator:	They've educated us on bonding and tie ridging on the farms for moisture conservation and ploughing across the this thing .... The slope.
Shani Haruna:	And, would you say water usage results in disagreements or causes disagreements?
Translator:	Yes, there is disagreement. And let's say you go to fetch water and someone ... You get there first and another person comes and say I'm to fetch before you and you say she won't fetch. You say, I'm the first person, she will say, I'm the first person. And second disagreement is, the owner of the well will say don't put this rope in the water. Someone will just come out from the house with the rope that the owner is not allowing to put there and kept it there. There will be disagreement.
Shani Haruna:	And how has the brave helped you to resolve or improve the disagreements you just mentioned?
Translator:	You will go and talk gently to them to arrange themselves by putting the first person on .... Their barrels in line for the fetching of the water. If it is done that they will not be disagreement again.
Shani Haruna:	So how has the brave helped him in managing such situations?
Translator:	Brave have helped by training, by giving an experience to me on patience .... On having patience to things like disagreement problems .... For solving disagreement problems.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And in your opinion, what do you think needs to happen to improve water access and management?
Translator:	Okay. how we will do in future for improvement of the water is we should have trees along the river .... Along the river bank. So that it will be .... The water will not go far because of the shade of the trees.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And finally, how has the brave helped to improve your income and assets?
Translator:	Brave have built our capacity on early harvesting and when to harvest and have good yield so that you will have .... And how to store it for good marketing. So, we have the capacity on whatever we are doing with our farm product. So because of the capacity building we have, we have improvement in our income.
Shani Haruna:	So we'll like to say thank you for your time and the experiences that you have shared with us.
Translator:	Also thanks for your interview.


