Shani Haruna:	This interview is with 402, annon number 009.
Translator:	I'm Sahadatu Mahama, a translator from 402 to Mr. Shani.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So we would like you to state your full name.
Translator:	Her name is 402.
Shani Haruna:	And what is your date of birth?
Translator:	40 years
Speaker 1:	Are you male or female?
Translator:	Female.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And do you hold any community positions?
Translator:	She's a community volunteer. A vice chairperson for health Borehole. 402 is the vice chairperson for community borehole committee. Health Borehole committee.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So we would like to .... We would like her to explain what her understanding of the brave project is.
Translator:	It is a man farming and it gives us experience and farming in the community.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So what do you know about that brave project?
Translator:	Farming. I know farming in the group. I know I havesting of water in the group. And what ... That's what I've learned ... I know.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And what did you learn under the brave project.
Translator:	I learned a lot from brave project. I learned weeding, when to weed and when to plough, and when to sow our seeds ... Crops. So we have the time we will plough, the time we will sow and the time we will weed the farm. That's what I learned from brave.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And what did you learn about water under the project?
Translator:	I let learn a lot from rain .... Harvesting of water and storage. I learned that you will harvest the water, have containers and put the water in and store it for some time to be used. So I learnt a lot from water harvesting ... Rainwater harvesting.
Shani Haruna:	And how did you find out about ... How did you find out information about the weather last season?
Translator:	I heard it from brave project.
Shani Haruna:	Apart from the brave project, which other source did you get the information?
Translator:	From raingauge recorders ... The community monitors. I've heard it from them in the groups.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. what about this season, how did they find out information about the weather?
Translator:	I heard it from brave project by Gmet people.
Shani Haruna:	How did they get the information to you?
Translator:	Brave project .... Madam Gladys brought gmet man to come and give the information to the group.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And when you heard the information, what did you do with the information in your farming activities?
Translator:	I used the information by making bonding in my farm and planting Legumes in our maize farm for the maize to have ... For the wet to be there ... Moisture to be there for the crops. That's what I know.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And in terms of the time that you sow, what changes did you make to the time that you sow your crops?
Translator:	I sowed early and later on I realized that the rain is to be above rainfall. So I went in and plant improved variety, which are early matured variety, so for that changes too I had good yield for that.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Then what about your fertilizer application? What changes did you make during your fertilizer application?
Translator:	I've changed my fertilizer application by drilling holes before applying the fertilizer and by applying the fertilizer in two weeks time. Like previous, I was just able to ...., I was just eager .... When I had the this thing I didn't mind when to apply, but whenever I had the fertilizer, that is the time I will apply. But now I know the time that I will apply the fertilizer and the way I will use the strategy I will use in applying the fertilizer for good yield.
Shani Haruna:	So why don't you spread the fertilizer again but now you drill hole under the plant and put the fertilizer in it?
Translator:	Because .... The reason why I drill holes before I apply is that if I didn't do that and I just applied it, it will wash by rain or the air will blow the this thing .... The power of the fertilizer and it will not work for the crop. That's why.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And what did ... What changes did you do to your harvesting?
Translator:	I have changed my harvesting by monitoring my maize whenever I saw the maize coming ... The leaves coming dry. I monitor it. If I see one one wet maize, I'll harvest it for good yield. And if it is groundnuts ... She didn't get to groundnuts. She just talked about the maize.
Shani Haruna:	So, what about the groundnuts?
Translator:	For the groundnuts, you have to monitor the groundnuts. Each time you monitor, you plug one and see whether the husk is black or still white. If it is black, you then harvest and you put it ... You capside the grounduts up for the sand to be removed, not to .... So that it won't regerminate when you harvest it and if you do that you just made sure that you go early with your partners and your group and go and harvest it.
Shani Haruna:	So in the future, what will be the best way for you to receive the weather information?
Translator:	I would like to hear from radio discussions .... Radio stations. It can have a information center in our community.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So do you think men listen to the radio more than women?
Translator:	Both men and women are listening to radio stations because they usually open the this thing .... The wireless set in the morning and evening. And morning and evening, women are still in the houses and they also listen to radio discussions.
Shani Haruna:	And who owns the radio sets that they listen to? Is it the man or the woman?
Translator:	Men have and few women have. Even as I'm sitting, I have one because brave gave me a radio set for listening.
Shani Haruna:	Do you think men have more phones than women?
Translator:	Men have phones than women because the youth boys .... All of the youth boys have phones and as for women somebody will like to have a phone, but due to poverty she won't get and she can't have a phone. So men have phones than womens.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	What kind of information do agric officers ... Agric extension officers give about water management?
Translator:	They give us information on harvesting water and storage .... Storing of water and for our household use and they .... We use that water for our important things like building, plastering, flooring of the this thing .... And so on.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And what kind of information do they give you about the weather?
Translator:	They gave us information on normal rainfall and above rainfall. A year, if it is 2018, we have normal rainfall they tell us. If it is 2019, we have above rainfall or low rainfall they will ... Below rainfall they will tell us. That information that they have been given to us.
Shani Haruna:	And what do they advise you to do with that information?
Translator:	Advice on sowing improved variety like early variety. We should plant early variety because if we have above rainfall and you didn't sow early variety and you sow the long variety ... The water ... Like water will come and ... Like if you sow a long the this thing .... The stream water may come up to that place and take your this thing. So we shouldn't plant along streams when it's above rainfall year.
Shani Haruna:	So what crops do you normally plant or cultivate?
Translator:	We used to plant ... To sow maize, groundnuts and soyabeans.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So how did you find information about the crops this season and last season? How did she find out information about the crops last season and this season?
Translator:	I heard the information in brave project meeting by agric extention ... Agric officer.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	What information did you hear about the crops?
Translator:	I had an information on to plant .... On shifting this thing .... Sifting cultivation. If you plant this groundnuts in this plot this year, next year you should plant maize, if you plant soyabean next year you should plant maize.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So what changes did you make to your farming activities as a result of the information you've been hearing on the radio or your heard on the radio?
Translator:	Changes have made because previously I've not been doing the shifting cultivation, but now I used to do shifting cultivation in my farm. So I've changed my this thing .... Crop planting.
Shani Haruna:	Did you make any changes to the varieties that you crop?
Translator:	I've been sowing four months soyabean, but now I've changed my variety on planting .... Sowing soyabean ... Three months soyabean which is a Janguma, which is called Janguma.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. what about the maize?
Translator:	Change maize too. I was planting the maize that I have since long, long time, which is four months variety, but now I have changed to wandata, which is three months.
Shani Haruna:	What about livestock? What changes have you made in your livestock rearing?
Translator:	I have changed my livestock rearing on guiding them inside the house. I don't leave them openly like that. And I used to convey their manure for farm use. So I have changed on that. I've changed my livestock rearing on ..... Like feeding like this I have left over food, which I've been driving for them, ... The bambara beans leaves, their husks and the beans husks, beans leaves. And I use .... For their health I called a veterinary officer to come and look at them.
Shani Haruna:	Yeah. Okay. So how did you find the well monitoring training that you received?
Translator:	No, I didn't, I didn't receive any training on the well monitoring.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Then do you think men and women have access to different information?
Translator:	No, they don't have different information.
Shani Haruna:	Why don't they have different information?
Translator:	Because of the gender issues, men and women have the same information. Because for the previous time the men, if the men are having discussion they sacked women away. But now the involve women in their decision making. So men and women have the same information.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So do you think men ge more information about water than women?
Translator:	Women have water information than men because women fetch water to the house for usage. Men doesn't have any information about .... Water information unless the woman tells the man.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And does that affect the relationship between men and women?
Translator:	No, it doesn't affect their relationship.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So, we're now coming to talk about water use management and the disagreements. So what do you normally use Water for?.
Translator:	There are so many usage of water. We use it plastering our houses, building our houses, Flooring our houses, drinking, Bathing, cooking, washing and livestock rearing .... Our livestock drinking.
Shani Haruna:	So, how are you able to manage such that you're able to use water for all the activities that you mentioned?
Translator:	We use frytol cans for .... The big cans for water storage, and we bought drums for storage of water. That is the things that we use because we don't have big cans to store water. But that one we use it for small this thing so that it will help to do something before.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And how has the brave project helped you to manage your water better?
Translator:	They've helped us by building our capacity on management. Water management by harvesting the water and storage of the water. That is how they help .... Brave people or brave project help.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. What other means or what other ways did the project help you to be able to manage water better?
Translator:	They helped me in making bonding on our farms and ploughing .... Cross ploughing on sloping places.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. then in your opinion, what needs to happen to improve water access here?
Translator:	If we would have a big tanks for the water storage, we'll have .... But we don't have money. We have been seeing it in the cities, but we don't have it in our community. If we would have had t, we would have preferred using that one to harvest the water for our usage.
Shani Haruna:	So apart from the what harvesting, what other thing needs to happen to improve water access?
Translator:	We'll make ... We'll monitor our boreholes well for not broken down the boreholes and we will dig a hand-dug Wells or Wells for the community so that we'll have enough water.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And finally, how has the brave project helped to increase your income?
Translator:	We learned from brave that we should do shifting cultivation. Through shifting cultivation we will have improved income. And we know there weather forecast too. We learned about the weather forecast. Through the weather forecast, we have enough income for our this thing. So we have .... Through this brave project, we now have good yield and good this thing .... Livestock, so that if you have a problem to solve and you want money, you have market for your this thing .... Goods and solve the problem. And it is through brave project that we can manage our income or resources.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So we'd like to thank you for your time and then the experiences that you have shared with us.
Speaker 2:	Thanks you for interviewing me.
