Shani Haruna:	This interview is with 409, anon number 011.
Translator:	I'm Sahadatu Mahama, a translator from 409 to Mr. Shani.
Shani Haruna:	So we would like you to state your full name, your date of birth and whether you are male or female.
Translator:	He's 409, 40 years and he's man.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And does he hold any community positions here?
Translator:	Yes. I'm the organizer of a VSLA box.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So now we would like you to explain what your understanding of the brave project is. What do you know about the .... About it?
Translator:	I learnt in ... I'm in farmer and water project group and I've learned on how to clear land a before ploughing.
Shani Haruna:	And what othing thing else did you learn?
Translator:	It is about clearing of land before ploughing and the application of this thing .... Fertilizer. And if it is .... It is fruiting you go and weed again.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And what did you learn about water under the brave project?
Translator:	I've learned rain water and ploughing across slope, slopes and rain water.
Shani Haruna:	You mentioned rain water. What did you learn about rain water?
Translator:	I've learnt harvesting rain water and if I'm to harvest it I have to clean my things and pour the dirty water, which is first away before I harvest the clean water and keep it.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And what did you also learn about boreholes and then wells?
Translator:	I've learned digging of a well. You use a rope and measure the starting of the well before I'll start digging the well.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And what did you learn about groundwater in the course of the group discussions that you've been part of?
Translator:	I learned about well building and you build the well and put a lid for closing the this thing .... The well for clean water. Every time you are going to sleep you close it and in the morning you open it for the women to fetch and later on you close it so that it won't contaminate.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	So we're now coming to talk about access to weather information and use. The first thing we would like to know is, how did you find out information about the weather last season?
Translator:	I had the weather information from farmer and water project group. And the information was if you are in the farm and it's about to rain, you have to hurry up and cross the river before the rains, if not that if it rains you can't cross the river again,
Shani Haruna:	Apart from the farmer and water group, where else did you find out information about the weather?
Translator:	Only farmer and water group.
Shani Haruna:	Did you hear some information about the weather from radio?
Translator:	No, I've never heard from radio.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	And has agric extension officer been giving you information about the weather?
Translator:	Yes. Extension officer have given me the information and it just from farmer and water project group.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Apart from the farmer and water group, how do you get access to the agric extension officer?
Translator:	Only the farmer and water group that I've been getting them, I don't have them in anywhere again.
Shani Haruna:	And how would you access the agric extension officer if the farmer and water group is not .... The brave project is not there?
Translator:	If it is that I'll get a wireless. Brave project gave me wireless and it has spoilt. So I'll get a wireless to be hearing from agric extension officers for weather information.
Shani Haruna:	Apart from the farmer and water group are there other groups where you find weather information from?
Translator:	No, I don't.
Shani Haruna:	Then how did you find out information about the weather this season?
Translator:	I've heard ... In 2019 I had it the weather information from brave project too.
Shani Haruna:	And which other source apart from the brave project group.
Translator:	No other place again. I've just heard it from the brave project group.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	You mentioned you got weather information, how did you use the information that you received? What did you use that information to do in your farming activities?
Translator:	I learned from weather information .... I learned there will be lightining when it is raining and if there is lightining we shouldn't lean against trees. And I shared the information to people .... To farmers that they shouldn't lean against trees when it is lightining.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Apart from the lightening, what other information did you learn about the rainfall that will help you in your farming activities?
Translator:	If you are to farm and you know that there's no too much moisture in your land you have to sow legumes in your crops so that it will attract moisture for your crops to do well.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And apart from that, which other did you learn about rainfall which will help you in your farming activities?
Translator:	You make bonding and tie ridging in your farm for your rice to have good yield.
Shani Haruna:	So when you heard the information, did you make any changes to the time that you normally sow your crops?
Translator:	I've learned that if you are going to sow and the moisture and like if you're going to do conversational agric you don't have to sow when there is too much moisture in your land. You have to let it dry before you sow. Otherwise if you sow millet it won't germinate.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So before you heard the weather information in what month did you normally sow your crops?
Translator:	I normally sowed my seeds whenever it rains in April, any time, day it rains in April I will go and sow.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So after you heard the weather information in what month did you sow your crops?
Translator:	Now, I used to sow .... Instead of April I'm now sowing in May.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. then before you heard the weather information what varieties were you sowing?
Translator:	I used to sow maize, millette and guinea corn.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And how long did take before they become ready for harvest?
Translator:	They used to be ready at four months time. Maize.
Shani Haruna:	How about the millet?
Translator:	As for the millet and the guinea corn they use to be ready at five months time.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And after you heard the weather information, did you make any changes to the varieties of the maize, the Sorghum and millet that you grow?
Translator:	Yes, I've changed, I've changed the maize, but the millet and the sorghum I didn't change. I've been using the same variety.
Shani Haruna:	So why did you change the maize?
Translator:	Through the weather information that I've heard I've realized that if I change my variety it will be better because if I sowed the one I was using, if there is hunger, I will suffer a lot. So I decided to change the maize so that it will come early and I'll wait for the millet.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And apart from the varieties, what other activities, either in the maize, sorghum and millet, did you change as a result of hearing information about the weather?
Speaker 2:	I don't change .... I didn't do any changes apart from that maize.
Shani Haruna:	So the weather information that you mentioned you heard, in the future, what do you think would be the best way for you to receive it?
Translator:	I would just use a radio set to hear the information.
Shani Haruna:	And apart from the radio which other way or method would you want to or medium would you want to receive the information apart from the radio?
Translator:	I don't know where I will get the information. I don't know where I would like to get the information.
Shani Haruna:	Do you think men listen to radio more than women?
Translator:	Men are listing information from radio than women because they usually open the radio at evening time. And the women are busy cooking in the evening, but the men, if you just come from the farm, you bath and go for prayers. After the prayers you just lie down and be listening your radio.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So what of other times of the day who listens to the radio than the other? Is it men or women?
Translator:	If it is not in the evening time, women are listening more than the men because men always go to their workside in day time. The women are in the house doing their activities.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And do you think men have more phones than women?
Translator:	Well all having equal .... Phones equal because if not the oldmen and oldwomen, for the youth and the men they have .... They both have phones equal.
Shani Haruna:	Why do you think they both have equal?
Translator:	There reason why both men and women have equal phones is that most of the times you have your child at far place. You want to communicate with that child, and two, we want to be using it to hear information from if they are announcing something in the radio and you want to ask something from the radio you call.
Shani Haruna:	What kind .... Do agric extension officers normally give you information about water management and weather when they visit you?
Translator:	Yes. They've ever said the information in our farmer and water group. They meet me there and I have ... They talk to me.
Shani Haruna:	And apart from the farmer and water group, do you have access to agric extension officers?
Translator:	Apart from the farmer and water group, I've never received their information anywhere.
Shani Haruna:	Why haven't you received their information?
Translator:	They didn't come and I don't know where to go and meet them and access the information.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. what crops do you normally grow?
Speaker 2:	I said maize, millet and sorghum.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And how did you find out information about the millet, maize and sorghum last year?
Translator:	From brave project that I've heard the information about the seeds. They said they have improved seeds, like rice, sorghum and maize.
Shani Haruna:	And how did ... Apart from the brsve which other source did you find information about your crops?
Translator:	I didn't hear the information anywhere apart from brave project.
Shani Haruna:	So for this season, the one that just ended, how did you find out information about the maize, millet and then sorghum?
Translator:	Just in the brave project that I've heard it again.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And if your crop had a disease, how did you find out that it had a disease? And what did you do about it?
Translator:	If you had a disease or how to know that your crops are having disease, you see the leaves with holes. So you get somebody who knows where to get the chemical for you to message that person or go to your community input dealer and buy the chemicals and go and spray the crops.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	And the informations that...... In the future, what do you think would be the best way for you to receive information about your crops?
Translator:	I would like to have the information from the brave project and if the brave project is not ... I'll just follow my members who are in that group so that if they go, they'll hear the information and tell me.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Then the informations you have been hearing on the radio, what changes did you use the information to do or make in your livestock rearing?
Translator:	I've known, changed my this thing .... In building a husbandary for my animals because unless the previous I was just .... They were just outside roaming and whenever I wants them I'll go and pick the one I'm in need. So now I used to build for them to be saved.
Shani Haruna:	And apart from the houses, what other changes did you make in your livestock rearing?
Translator:	If you .... For the good care for the animals you will find .... If any time you sees that the animal is sick, you will go and get veterinary officer to come and immunize or give mebendazole to the animal.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	So besides the immunization and then the housing did you make any other changes to your livestock rearing activities?
Translator:	No, I didn't.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	Then how did you find out the well monitoring training that you received?
Translator:	I didn't have any training on well monitoring.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And do you think men and women have access to different information here in Jawani?
Translator:	They all have the same information.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Sowhy do you think they all have the same information?
Translator:	If a man had an information, if you want to say it to someone like a woman, she will also say the same information ... Share the same information that you've heard. So they all share the same information.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And do you think men get more information about water than women?
Translator:	Women have more information in water than men, because women fetch water for their activities more than men. That's why they had the information than men.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And does that affect relationship between men and women?
Translator:	It will not .... It doesn't have any effect because women, if there is a problem, like water problem, if women say to the men, they will help them to solve it. So it won't have any affect in the relationship.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So we're now going to talk about water use, management and disagreements? So what do you normally use water for?
Translator:	We use water for cooking, drinking and bathing. That's all.
Shani Haruna:	What other activities apart from the ones that you mentioned that do you use water for?
Translator:	We use water for building of our houses, washing and plastering.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So the activities that you just mentioned, what has allowed you to plan your water better?
Translator:	If it is raining season, you harvest rainwater in a drum and keep it for your activities.
Shani Haruna:	What other things do you do?
Translator:	I don't know what to do and save it again, and manage it for my activities again.
Shani Haruna:	And have you changed how you use water because of this.
Translator:	Like if you're having water problem because you have harvest water for your activities, the problem ... You won't get the problem again.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And how has that brave helped you to manage your water better?
Translator:	You will boil the water that you stored for your this thing ... Your activities whenever it have worms you boil it and store it again.
Shani Haruna:	Apart from the boiling, what other way has the brave helped you to manage your water better?
Translator:	After the boiling you have to roof it well so that it will not dirty .... It will not contaminate.
Shani Haruna:	How has the brave helped your community?
New Speaker:	They've helped it. Brave have help us boiling water to be clean for us in the community. So the way it helps It's good for us, for the boiling of the water to be clean.
New Speaker:	And would you say water usage results in disagreements here in Jawani?
Translator:	It has disagreement. It has disagreement because someone will come first and the other one will come and want to fetch before the first person. That's the time that the disagreement will come.
Shani Haruna:	And how has the brave help to improve such disagreements?
Translator:	Brave have help to advise the last person who came and it was ... And the disagreement was there. You advice her not to repeat that again next time.
Shani Haruna:	And which other way does he think the brave project has helped again in resolving such disagreements?
Translator:	I didn't know anything again.
Shani Haruna:	In your opinion, what needs to happen to improve water access and management in Jawani?
Speaker 2:	In future I would like to say if we will have have a section meeting because we have sections boreholes and the boreholes are broken down. So we will have meet and discuss on how to repair the boreholes and contribute. If we should drill one, we will contribute and get to assembly for borehole drilling so that we will have more boreholes in future.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And how has the brave helped you to improve your income and assets?
Translator:	It has ..... It has help to plan for the sales of your product before you sell. Unless previous we were just selling by heart. And you don't know the price of your product. You just sell. But project brave has made us to plan before and know the market from the business women and men before selling our products.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So what other thing changed here in Jawani since the brave project started?
Speaker 2:	It has change .... Brave project has change in harvesting water. In previous, we don't know if you harvest, water and store the water for your water usage. But now we know that you can store water and manage it for your water activities.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. what other change has happened apart from the water storage .... Apart from water harvesting?
Translator:	I didn't see any changes again.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. We'll like to thank you so much for your time and then the experiences that you have shared with us.
Speaker 2:	I've also thanked for your time in interviewing me in this project.
