Shani Haruna:	This is interview with 411 anon number 013.
Translator:	I'm Sahadatu Mahama and I am the translator from 411 to Mr. Shani.
Shani Haruna:	So thanks so much. It's good to have you to speak with you. Okay. So we would like her to state her full name.
Translator:	She's 411.
Shani Haruna:	And what is her date of birth?
Translator:	She is 63.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And it she male or female?
Translator:	Female.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And does she hold any position here?
Translator:	She is a VSLA chairperson.
Shani Haruna:	Okay, so now we would like to know, what is her understanding of the brave project?
Translator:	That brave project is about the capacity building to the groups.
Shani Haruna:	And what did she learn under the brave project?
Translator:	That she learns ... She learned farming.
Shani Haruna:	What about the farming did she learn?
Translator:	To go and visit .... She learns to go and visit the farm and know when and how ... The acres that she will farm for the next year season.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. besides that what other thing did she learn from the brave project?
Translator:	She learns the measurement of the sowing. Yes.
Shani Haruna:	What did she learn about water?
Translator:	She learned how to harvest rainwater for her house consumption and for farm use. Last .... For the previous, she doesn't know that the water is important, but now she learnt that the water is important for her to harvest it and store for her home activities.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So how does she harvest the water?
Translator:	She borrowed money from the VSLA box and bought a drum and Jerry cans for harvesting the water and storage.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	Then what did she learn about boreholes and then wells?
Speaker 3:	That she learns to dug a hand well for water to be used. And the water .... When she learned that she learns to make .... To keep the well well for clean water to be used.
Shani Haruna:	So has she been able to dig her own well?
Translator:	She learns how .... Because of that she learns how to dig ..... She was able to dig a well, but the well get to a stone ... A rock in which she can't break the rock and she ignore it. But the hand dug wells .... Small small hand dug wells, she dug it in the farm for water to be used for the farm.
Shani Haruna:	We're now going to talk about access to weather information and then use. Under this discussion the first thing we would like to know is, how did she find out information about the weather last season?
Translator:	She learned that 2018 the rain was normal but 2019 it was above.
Shani Haruna:	So the 2018 weather, where did she get the information from?
Translator:	She says the Agric officers used to spread the information for them to hear. And we have rain gauge recoders, they too they talk, they give information on rain ... About rainfall.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So how did the agric officers and get the information to them ... To her?
Translator:	They come to the community in a group and ....
Shani Haruna:	Okay, so apart from the agric officers and then the rain gauge, which other source did she get information about the weather from?
Translator:	That she has .... She had the information from groups and radio discussions.
Shani Haruna:	What kind of group and which radio station?
Translator:	Vsla groups and tizaa radio, nobel radio from Nalerigu.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	Apart from those ones .... The radio stations that you mentioned, which other radio station did she listen to?
Translator:	Ura radio from Bolga.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	The agric officers that she mentioned, how she get them to get the information about the weather?
Translator:	That there is a community meeting in the community whereby the agric officers comes to their group meetings and some in vsla groups, community groups, wherever they have a group they'll invite the officers to come.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	So apart from the VSLA groups are there other places where she gets the weather information from?
Translator:	From radio stations. Apart from radio stations, she doesn't hear it from any place again.
Shani Haruna:	So you've ... How did you also find out information about the weather this season? The one that just ended.
Translator:	For 2019 she hears the information from Gmet and radio stations as she has been hearing and the vsla groups and the rain gauge recorders ... From the recorders.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	So the rain gauge recorders, what do they do with the information that they record?
Translator:	The rain gauge recorders, they will record the day, the date and the rain pattern and they'll come to a group and say, this rain has .... We have heavy rain today or yesterday we have heavy rain and anytime there is a little rain they will come and say we have rain. This rain was small. It was not enough. And especially the onset day .... The onset day.... They'll record it. They'll say .... If the rain for ... They hear the information from PSP participatory scenario planning group meetings. So if they come with that and they'll tell them the onset date and if the rails it comes on that day or the week and the rain is not enough for planting, they'll announce it. They'll say it in the groups that this rain is not enough for planting or for sowing. And if the rain is enough for sowing, they'll say this rain is enough for sowing. Maybe sometimes the rain will rain and it will enough for sowing "niri" but not groundnuts or maize. So that information that they have been hearing from the rain gauge recorders.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So now the weather information that she heard, what Did she do it to those information?
Translator:	Now that I've been hearing it, the information for the weather, I used to know the outcome of farming or rainfall than previous that I was doing.
Shani Haruna:	So what did she use the information to do in her farming?
Translator:	I use that to sow my my maize, the onset day. I use the onset day of the rain to sow my maize.
Shani Haruna:	So what other changes did she make because she heard information about the weather?
Translator:	I've used the knowledge that I've heard to plough than previous because when I was not hearing it, I used to just farm anyhow. But now I'm using the information to sow my crops.
Shani Haruna:	So apart from the .... So apart from the sowing time, which you said you've .... It helped you to know when to sow are there other things that you changed in your farming activities as a result of hearing the weather information?
Translator:	I used to to weed early than how I was doing because previous I was not weeding early in my farm, but now I used to weed early for the crops to grow fast.
Shani Haruna:	Then, did you make any changes to the varieties that you grow?
New Speaker:	She changed soya bean and groundnuts planting. She's changed where .... She has changed variety by soyabean when she harvest maize this year, and next year she used to change variety to plant the ... She doesn't cross planting, she doesn't plant one plot every year.
Shani Haruna:	She mentioned something about the new varieties. What varieties did she start using?
Translator:	I was just sowing groundnuts and maize, but I have changed a new variety like soya bean. I'm now sowing soya bean in addition to my seeds.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	How long does it take your maize varieties to be ready for harvesting?
Translator:	3 months variety, that's 90 days.
Shani Haruna:	And, the old varieties that you use, how long was it taking before harvesting?
Translator:	That variety was five months.
Shani Haruna:	So what about the groundnuts? How long does the variety that she sows now it takes to be ready for harvesting?
Translator:	If we plant the groundnuts and the drought hasn't come you will harvest it in three months time, but if there is drought spell it will get to four months.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	How long did the old variety used to take before it was ready for harvesting?
Translator:	That old groundnuts was just three and a half months.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So did she make any changes to her livestock rearing because of the weather information that she heard?
Translator:	Yes, I've changed.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	What changes did she make to her livestock rearing?
Translator:	I've changed my livestock Rearing. Previous, I don't have a room for them, but now I have room for them and I used to convey rice husks to spread in the room. I used to gather them in the evening inside the rooms. I now have feeds for them. If we farm and I get this beans leaves, I will harvest the beans leaves and keep for them for dry season grazing. And I used to call veterinary officers to come and attend to my livestock.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So in the future, what is the best way she thinks she can have access to weathat information? What does she think is the best way to access for her to access weather information?
Translator:	I'll be hearing from ... I like to be hearing from radio stations and the from the rain gauge who they should encourage building the rain gauge recorders' information's that from this thing .... From Weather ... Giving weather information to rain gauge recorders so that they will spread it for them to be hearing.
Shani Haruna:	So she mentioned she hears the information from the radio. Who owns the radio ... The wireless sets that she listens to?
Translator:	I have my own wireless set to be hearing because brave project gave me a wireless for that.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So, men and women, who does she think listen to radio more?
Translator:	Women are hearing it more than men because men used to operate it and go out. But women are still in the house that evening for their house activities so they hear more than men.
Shani Haruna:	And men and women who does she think have more phones than the other?
Translator:	Men have phones than women.
Shani Haruna:	Why does she think it's so?
Translator:	Men have more than women because women are suspected by the husbands if a woman is having the phone.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	So you mentioned she grows .... She grows maize, groundnuts and soya beans. Okay. So last season, how did she find out information about that crops that she grows?
Translator:	Yes, she heard the information from vsla groups, community meetings and we have a apex body ... Vsla apex body meeting .... From there .... I have been hearing from that groups. The seeds .... Improves seeds from that group.
Shani Haruna:	So the VSLA apex body, what does it do?
Translator:	It ... We have the VSLAs from the communities. All the VSLA groups have one group at Nalerigu in which they meet and discuss. They open bank accounts. They have cooperative certificate. Assembly people knows about them. Whenever they have this thing .... And they are doing contribution. They are advocating, their vsla activities and lobbying for farm farming activities. Whenever they have a problem they goes to assembly and lobby for help.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	What about last season? How did she ... Where did ... How did she find out information about the crops that she grows?
Translator:	2019?
Shani Haruna:	Yes, 2019.
Translator:	I've heard it from the same places that I have mentioned and from brave project too.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	In the future, what will be the best way for her to receive such information?
Translator:	I want hear .... In future about ... I want to hear the information from radio stations and I like the radio station by God's grace to be in our own community so that I'll be hearing from there.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So apart from the radio station which other way does she think is best for her to receive the information?
Translator:	I would like to hear it from the groups I've been hearing and from brave people to extend the groups and give the informations in the groups so that I'll be hearing it from the groups.
Shani Haruna:	The radio programs that she has been hearing, either on the weather or generally on the farming activities, we would like to know what activitieseither in her farming or livestock rearing, did she make any changes to as a result of the information that she heard on the radio.
Translator:	I have change in maize harvesting. Previous, I was just looking at the maize to be dry with the stalks and everything. But now if I just get inside and saw one wet maize, I'll start harvesting
Shani Haruna:	What about the groundnuts? What .... Have you made any changes in that one too?
Translator:	I looked at my groundnuts when .... I monitor my groundnuts every time and whenever I get the groundnuts leaves being red I will pick one and see inside ... And dehusk and see what the ... How it is, and if the husk is black inside, I would just know that it has .... It is okay for harvesting. But previous I will leave it and say it is not yet regrwoing .... Regerminating before I harvest. But now I don't stand to get the regerminating before I harvest.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So how did she find the Well monitoring training that she received?
Translator:	She's not part of the committee, she didn't take any training on well monitoring.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So in her opinion does she think that men and women have access to different information?
Translator:	Yes. Men have .... Men and women have different informations because men roam their way and women too go and gather with their fellow women. So men will have their information from their group or their sitting place and women too will bring their information from where they come from. So they will all come and share it together.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So what kind of information do women normally have?
Translator:	I can't give a particular answer on that information.
Shani Haruna:	So do women get more information about water more than men?
Translator:	Yes women have more information in water than men.
Shani Haruna:	Why do women have more information about water than men?
Translator:	Mecause women use water than men. That's why women always have information about water than men.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So does that affect the relationship between men and women?
Translator:	It have good relationship with men and women because they will get the information and get the water for men to do ..... It have a good relationship to men and women because women will get the water information and use it as what men wants to do with the water.
Shani Haruna:	So we're now coming to talk about water uses, the management and disagreements. What does she normally use water for? What activities does she use water for?
Translator:	I use it for cooking, bathing, drinking and business. Using it for rice business.
Shani Haruna:	What kind of rice business?
Translator:	She use it for rice .... Parboiling of rice for sale.
Shani Haruna:	Sowhat has allowed her to plan her water use better?
Translator:	Through brave project that I've learned that I can save money and buy a drum for water storage and because I can store water .... I used to get water from the vsla and buy rice for parboiling. And it has use for me to manage my water and do that.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	So how has that brave project helped her to be able to manage her water better?
Translator:	Brave have built my capacity on storage of water .... Harvesting water and storage. And through that I have .... I get my drums for water to do my this thing ..... To manage my activities.
Shani Haruna:	So in her opinion, what needs to happen to improve water access?
Translator:	We will see the chief and the elders to have a community meeting on how to do and get more wells .. Hand-Dugs wells for the community to have access to improved water.
Shani Haruna:	So, what about the water the water that she uses on her farms? The dry season farming that ... The hand-dug wells that she mentioned.... What does she think needs to happen so that she can have more water to farm?
Translator:	You have to look carefully and fence the this thing ... The hand-dug wells for animals not to step inside it and you come and convey the first water, which is full and dirty for them in a different hole for them to come and be drinking and leave that one. If not raining season that one will not do anything. It will not spoil.
Shani Haruna:	And where are those hand-dug wells? Where do you dig them?
Translator:	At the stream side. They will go and dig them by .... Some are ... If the stream water is not more there running, they will just dig by the edges there so that they will be using that too.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So finally, how has the brave project helped you to increase your income?
Translator:	Help me to have a business because I used to harvest water and do a parboiling of rice for sale. So it generates income for me.
Shani Haruna:	Is there any other source that she makes income?
Translator:	It helps me to have an income because the livestock rearing, I used to learn when and what and how I will handle my livestock. And now I have more livestock to be selling. If anytime I wants to sell, like if I was telling five cedi, I'll now sell it 10 cedi because it have a good care.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So we'll like to say thank you for your time and for sharing your experiences with us. We're much grateful speaking to you.
Translator:	I also thanked for what you've interview me and you have time for me to talk. Thank you.
