Shani Haruna:	This interview is with 413, annon number 007.
Translator:	I'm sahadatu Mahama, the translator from 413 to Mr Shani.
Shani Haruna:	So we would like you to state your full name, date of birth and whether it's female or male.
Translator:	Her name is 413. She's 46 years old. She is a woman.
Shani Haruna:	And does she hold any community positions?
Translator:	No she hasn't.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So now we would like her to explain what her understanding of the brave project is.
Translator:	My understanding of farmer and water project is ... My understanding the of brave project is that, we are learning on farm farming activities, which we learn how to farm, the time ... The period of farming, the period of harvesting and so on.
Shani Haruna:	What did you learn about water under the brave project?
Translator:	We learned that the hand-dug wells water is fine ... Is good for drinking, unless the stream, water. That water is contaminated water.
Shani Haruna:	And what did you also learn about groundwater?
Translator:	I've learned that the well water is clean than the stream water. So we have a well water, which we had a lid for the well in which we fetch and close, but we don't have borehole, we have broken boreholes in .... Which are not working.
Shani Haruna:	How did she find out information about the weather last season and this season?
Translator:	For 2018, I've heard the information on weather that we will have normal rainfall, which was true. It started with small, small and later on it comes, heavy rains. It rains heavy rains and spoiled our food. But 2019, it was just heavy rainfalls which was coming from the starting up to the end and it is above rainfall as they said.
Shani Haruna:	And where did you hear the information about the weather?
Translator:	From brave project people by gmet .... From brave project by gmet people, Eagle FM which is radio station and URA radio, and community monitors who are recording raingauge data.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And when you had the weather information, what did you ... What did you use it for in your farming activities?
Translator:	I kept bonding and tie ridging in my farm ... In my farm. What I've used it for .... That's what I've used it for. I've made the bonding and tie ridging in my farm and I have .... I had a cowpea, bambara beans, groundnuts and rice.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. The crops that you mentioned, what specific activities did you use the information to change in the ... In your production of those crops?
Translator:	Yeah, I was cultivating maize in my farm land. Because of this project .... Brave project I've decided to change, cultivating maize and soyabeans for good yield. And now I've ... I'm having good yield for that land.
Shani Haruna:	So what did you hear about the maize and the crops that you grow, the soyabean, that made you to start using it?
Translator:	I've heard it from brave project by ... At brave project from gmet people, Eagle FM and in our group discussions. From brave project .... At brave project, from gmet people and Eagle FM and group discussions. They have a group in VSLA group, so she heard it from that places.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And in the future what would be the best way for her to receive weather information?
Translator:	We'll still hear it ... The information from ura FM, ura raadio.
Shani Haruna:	The radio set that she listen to the information from who owns it?
Translator:	The radioset is my own because bravr project gave me a radio set. So I'm the owner of the radio set.
Shani Haruna:	And who you uses the radio set most, is it she or her husband? Yeah, her husband.
Translator:	I myself ... I myself used to operate it regularly.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And do men have more phones than women here?
Translator:	Men have more phones than women because women ... Woman is poor. They don't have money to buy phones. That's why men have more phones than women.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And what kind of ... What information do agric extension officers give her about water management when they visit her?
Translator:	Mofa people gave us the information on weather that there will be heavy rainfall this year. And it's true. It has done. Rain have .... We had heavy rainfalls this year.
Shani Haruna:	What crops does she grow?
Translator:	I've cultivated soyabean, maize and Bambara beans.
Shani Haruna:	And how did she find out information about the crops?
Translator:	I've just used my own ... Use my own seeds, which I've been using this year.
Shani Haruna:	So you didn't ask for information about the crops from any source?
Translator:	I've asked for seeds last two years when I was ... I was to cultivate it ... I cultivated it in the this thing ... The yard. So because it was late, they've harvest and I lost on that this thing. So I asked the discussion on brave project day whether I can it or not. And the mofa .... The agric extension officer told me that if it hasn't done anything, I kept it well, I can use it. So I didn't ask of seeds again. I just used that seeds to sow this 2019.
Shani Haruna:	So you mentioned you found information about them from the agric officers. So which other people or groups did you find information from?
Translator:	I've been hearing my information from ura fm. Weather information from ura fm and GBC.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So the information you have been hearing on the radio, what changes did you make in your farming activities as a result of the information you heard on the radio?
Translator:	How I changed my view in farming activities is, I've ... I was a broadcasting my groundnuts, but since this project has educated on farming activities, I've decided to change and sowing with my hand. During sowing my groundnuts I've never broadcast it again.
Shani Haruna:	So apart from the broadcasting and sowing what other activities have you changed in your groundnuts as a result of the information you heard on the radio?
Translator:	Change by weeding my groundnuts early for the weeds not to affect the groundnuts.
Shani Haruna:	Then the soybeans, what changes did you make in your soybeans?
Translator:	Like what I said in the groundnuts sowing, I used to broadcast my soyabean too but now I'm using my hand to sow my soyabeans. And I monitor the soyabean, when it's ready for harvesting I look at the leaves if all the leaves are yellow, I will try and I will start harvesting my soyabean.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Then what about the livestock? What are the changes that you made in your livestock activities?
Translator:	I was rearing my ruminants just ... I would just have it calling it my goat or my sheep. But now I used to have their housing for them. I built the house ... The housing, and I made it claim for them to be staying there. And the food too, I used to give them food for ... And water for drinking in their place where they live. So they are now active and good for what I want to do.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Then how did you find the well monitoring training that you received?
Translator:	I didn't have .... I didn't have well monitoring training.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And do you think men and women have access to different information?
Translator:	Yes, they have. Men and women have different informations.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. What information do men have?
Translator:	I can't tell the different informations.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And do men get more information about water than women?
Translator:	Women have more inform... Water information than men because women search for water. That's why they have more information on water than men.
Shani Haruna:	And does that affect the relationship between men and women?
Translator:	No, it doesn't affect the relationship.
Shani Haruna:	What do you normally use water for? What activities do you use water for?
Translator:	We use water for bathing, drinking, cooking, washing basins, washing clothing and whatever. It's so many things that water ... We use water to do.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	So how has the brave project helped you to manage your water better?
Translator:	Water project have educated us .... Has built our capacity on harvesting .... Rainwater harvesting, which helps us to have our water ... To manage our water for our activities.
Shani Haruna:	Apart from the water harvesting that you mentioned, what other knowledge have you acquired from the brave project that has helped you to manage your water better?
Translator:	Since I've harvest it, I'll know how to manage it and it will ... I will benefit from the water.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. would you say that water usage results in disagreements?
Translator:	There is no disagreement. No, there is no disagreement.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. In your opinion, what needs to happen to improve water access and management here in Jawani?
Speaker 2:	We'll send .... For the future use we will send someone to assembly ... District assembly so that they will come.they will also get water sanitation people to come and see how they can do to repair our boreholes for us so that we'll have enough water in future.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And lastly, how has the brave helped you to increase your income and assets?
Translator:	I've ... They've helped a lot. Brave have helped me cultivate ... Know how I will cultivate my product and get more yield. Through that getting more yield I improve my income and the this thing .... For the small ruminants it has helped a lot because I was just rearing them for thieves. But now when since I've made their this thing for them ... Small ruminants houses for them, I have so many ruminants for my .... To improve my income. In case of having a problem I will just sell one and do what I want to do.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So we will like to thank you so much for your time and the experiences that you have shared with us.
Translator:	I've also thanked you for your time, for interviewing me today.

