Shani Haruna:	This is interview with 301, annon number 003.
Translator:	to do the translation on behalf of 301 I am Atirago Kate Atipoaka.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So, we'll like to know your full name, your date of birth and whether you are male or female.
Translator:	My name is 301. My date of birth is April, 1964. I am a male.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. do you hold any position here?
Translator:	Yes. I hold a position. I'm the chairman for the community VSLA.
Shani Haruna:	okay. So now we'll like to know, what is your understanding of the brave project? What do you know about that brave project?
Translator:	I have learnt about new methods of farming and livestock rearing and I've learned that when I acquire the knowledge from this project I will also use it to educate my colleagues who have not gotten the knowledge.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So, apart from the farming, what other things did they speak about in the project?
Translator:	I've learned to always comport myself. I tolerate people. I will not just see someone and start disrespecting or insulting the person.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And then what did they... What information did they give to you about water in the brave project?
Translator:	What I've learned about water is that if you're having a farm that is not...[recorder memory gets full and I had to turn it off and transfer some of the audio files to my laptop to create more space]
Shani Haruna:	This is a continuation of the interview with 301.
Shani Haruna:	So what information did you hear about water in the project?
Translator:	The information I heard from this project about water was that if you are having a land that is not flat, and it is sloping then what you need to do is, you should know how to plough. When you are ploughing, you make sure that you plough across in a way that when it rains, water will not just slope down or go freely whereby your farm will be dry. You can also do bonding across the sloping side so that it will absorb water and you have moisture all the time.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So what did they.... What information did they give you about boreholes and then wells?
Translator:	Yeah, through the project we had information on boreholes and wells. They have ever given us a mechanized borehole. The one which is using manpower. But later on we had the pipes that we are using through this project.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So, we're now going to talk about access to weather information and how they use it. Okay. So we would like to know, how did he find out information about the weather last season?
Translator:	Last season, the information I heard was that that particular year we will not have enough rains like the previous year, so we should plant early so that it may not affect our crops.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. When did.... Where did you get that information? What was the source of that information?
Translator:	The information was from agric extension officers. They came here that time to brief us on the weather or educate us on the weather and the practices that we should adopt.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Apart from the extension officers, which other source did you get information about the weather from?
Translator:	The politicians sometimes organize rally and talk to us on how we should be serious with our farming. And sometime district assemblies too will organize programs and tell us that we should take our farming activities seriously. So through those meetings too we get knowledge on the weather.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So how did you find out information about the weather this season?
Translator:	The information I heard this season about the weather was that in the 11th month that's November, we will not have rains again. So we were told on what kind of crops and varieties that we should plant.
Shani Haruna:	So what varieties were you advised to sow?
Translator:	We were asked to plant maize, cowpea, soybeans earlier. But unfortunately, me for instance, I didn't listen. So due to that when I planted, I didn't cultivate well.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. why did they advise you to sow those varieties?
Translator:	We were told that those crops will do well unlike the millet. The millet needs rains for long time. So because the rains will not be there for long, we were asked to go in for those varieties.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So are you able to mention some of the varieties that you sowed?
Translator:	For the varieties I can't tell.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So you mentioned you heard a lot about the weather information. Where did that information come from?
Translator:	I was hearing the information from Quality radio at Garu.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Then who were giving that information on that radio station?
Translator:	For this I can't tell.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So the information that you heard about the weather, what changes did you use that information to do in your farming activities?
Translator:	There wasn't any change in myself though, but my colleagues who followed the advice from the experts were able to have good yield. But because I didn't listen or I didn't start planting the time that we were advised to plant mine didn't do well.
Shani Haruna:	So we'll like you to share your experience with us about your friends; what they heard and then what they did as a result of the information and what the results is for them.
Translator:	I'm sure it's just the advice that was given on air that my colleague or my friend was able to follow it well. That yielded the good yields for him.
Speaker 2:	Okay. then why didn't also use that information that you heard on the radio?
Translator:	I think mine was just ignorance. I didn't believe or I didn't trust that information and that was why it led me to that.
Speaker 1:	Okay. Then why didn't you belief in that information?
Translator:	I'm someone who doesn't sit at one particular place. Though I had the intention to follow those procedure but going up and down, by the time I realized the dates or the time we were advised to plant exceeded.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So in the future, what would be the best way for him to receive information about the weather?
Translator:	In future, if I should hear this information or information about the weather on radio, it will help. If I should hear it this time I don't think I'll repeat the mistake I did.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And then do you think men listen to radio more than women here?
Translator:	I think men listen to radio more than women because almost every man has a radio set. And in the evening, for instance, when you are back from your farm to the house, what you need to do is just to bath and open your radio set and listen to what is happening.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So why are women not having radio sets or have lesser radio sets than men?
Translator:	Some of the women cannot afford and those who can afford, sometimes their children will even seize it from them to be using to listen whatever they want and just forget of their mothers. So that is the reason why men have radio set than women.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Then, apart from the radio sets, is there any other better way that they can get weather information besides the radio?
Translator:	Apart from radio, I don't think there will be any other source.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. so men and women here, who have more phones than the other and why?
Translator:	I think men have phones more than women because men have privilege than women. Even if the person is even a boy, he can do his own things that no one can maybe say anything but women there are some things that are limited to them.
Shani Haruna:	So, what are the things that are limited to the women?
Translator:	Most of the women cannot afford due to poverty. The few who have access are those who have children maybe down south who always maybe get them some, but the poverty rate is high for most of them to afford phones.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. No. Okay. then how often do agric extension officers visit to give them advice on their farming activities?
Translator:	Yes, they do come, especially during the dry season like this or dry season farming. They come to our houses to check on our livestock. If it is a during raining season before the rains even set in, they will also come and talk to us before they start talking on radio for us to be hearing of whatever they have for us.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So when they visit, what information do they give them about water management?
Translator:	Their advise on water management is just what I said earlier because they make sure, we those who our lands are not flat but the sloping type, they'll be advising us on how to plough, how to do bonding so that the water wouldn't be flowing all the time.
Shani Haruna:	What about the dam water? Do they give you advice on how to manage it?
Translator:	I haven't gotten any information from the extension officers on maybe our dam rehabilitation or how to manage it, but the community people are the very people who normally take care of that. And I was even once a chairman for our community dam. But unfortunately, it got to some point that the chief involved himself and I have to just come out with that position because it was the community members who chose me and when it go to that aspect or where the chief involved himself I decided to quit from that position.
Shani Haruna:	So we're now going to talk about access to crop information and then use. So what crops do you grow?
Translator:	I plant millet, maize, soybeans, and cowpea. If it is the dry season too I always plant or nurse onions in my gardens.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So the crops you have mentioned, where did you find information about them last season?
Translator:	Those crops, I saw them from friends or relatives. So I also engage with them and had access to those varieties or those seeds to also plant.
Shani Haruna:	So for instance, if your crop had a disease, how did you know that it had a disease? Or how did you get information about the crops?
Translator:	Yeah. Normally, sometimes we witness some insects or some birds on our crops. But when it happens too, how we normally do is to go to PAS-G, that's the Garu Presby Agric Station and explain to them how maybe those insects are so that they will help us get chemicals for spraying.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So apart from the PAS-G, which other institution do you go to for information about your crops?
Translator:	Okay. You can also get maybe a variety or a good seeds for your farm through maybe moving with friends. In terms of conversation, you may have an information from a friend that this particular seed I have used it and it is very good and you can also maybe have it and try it and see how it actually goes.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So what would be the best way for him to receive such information in the future?
Translator:	In future I'll like to maybe be getting information like this from a program such as this brave project and maybe from friends. As I move with friends or I do visit people, I can also be getting information on crops from them.
Shani Haruna:	So the information is that you got on the crops, what changes did it help you to make in your farming activities?
Translator:	The changes I've made or the change I've made is, like those days I didn't consider the quantity of the fertilizer I'm having. I can plant number of hectors and I may not even get fertilizer a quarter or half of it and it will go waste, it won't do well. But for the information I've been hearing I plant according to how I think I can afford fertilizer and apply. So that's the changes I have made.
Shani Haruna:	Are there other changes apart from the fertilizer, that you have for made?
Translator:	I also made changes in my livestock because those days I was practicing extensive methods of a rearing but through the information I make sure I get time for my animals; how they will eat, where to sleep and whatever will make them comfortable.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. We're now coming to talk about well monitoring. Did you receive a training on well monitoring?
Translator:	I've not gotten any training from well monitoring.
Shani Haruna:	So we'll now talk about how men and women have access to information here. So in his opinion does he think that men and women have access to different information?
Translator:	I will say no because the community have community radio. So whatever information they have, it is always passed through that, that is on air. So everybody always hear what is happening.
Shani Haruna:	And do you also think that men get more information about water than women?
Translator:	I don't believe this. It is the other way round. I think a woman get water information first because it is women who go to fetch water. And if there's any information about water, whoever is coming to give them water, it's always the women that they will even brief them or sit with them before it comes out.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So does that affect the relationship between men and women here?
Translator:	I don't think it spoils any relationship or bring misunderstanding because it is the woman who does the fetching. So I don't see why maybe they'll get the information maybe first and it will lead to maybe disagreement. I for instance I don't even go to the borehole that is closer me but I bath every day. So now that it's the woman who does the fetching there's no any problem.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. you also mentioned something about a community radio station or information center. What kind of information do they normally give out?
Translator:	This community radio or information center, the kind of information that we hear or share it here is the information that always comes from agric station or if it is this discussion that we normally air it on GBC I think the one who is taking care of it or the presenter here will do the recording and always have a particular time that he plays it on air here for the whole community to listen.
Shani Haruna:	That's good.
Shani Haruna:	So we're now coming to talk about water management, use and disagreements. What has allowed him to be able to plan his water use better?
Translator:	The information I've heard about water management or usage is that, we are told or taught how to use good water or quality water. Those days, we didn't care the kind of water to drink. Especially when you are thirsty, you can just see underground water or maybe a river water or whatever and you would drink from it. But due to this information we have been hearing and the boreholes that we have forgotten there's quality water for us to always drink.
Shani Haruna:	So how has the brave project helped you to manage your water better?
Translator:	What I've learned from this project on water management is that previously we didn't know when you are to fetch water you should make sure your containers are neatly washed. But for now through the project or the program, normally we make sure we wash our containers. Even, if it is the local pot make sure you wash it and cover. Don't let mosquitoes or insects to always be in the water and you'll be drinking it like that.
Shani Haruna:	So the water facilities that they have here, are there groups that are responsible for managing them?
Translator:	Yes. We have groups who take care of these boreholes, wells and dams. And it is we the community members who have sat down to choose these people.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. what do you call those.... Those groups that are managing the water facilities, what do they call them?
Translator:	We don't have names. We only... What we only do is that this group is for this particular borehole, this group is for the dam and this group is for a well but we don't have names given to the groups.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So those that they choose to manage the water facilities, how do they choose them? What do they consider before they choose those people?
Translator:	The only qualities or procedure we follow is we make sure the person will admit that she or he will agree to do the work. And normally what we do is that we don't always choose them from one particular let's say clan or this thing. We make sure that they will come from different places especially if it's a dam.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. thenwould you say the usage of the boreholes and dams result in disagreements?
Translator:	It doesn't bring any disagreement between those who are using it. Why we choose the leaders is that any time there's maybe the borehole or there's a fault, they're the very people who will lead them maybe to those in charge for them to maybe have information and come and see how they will solve it for them.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. then, what needs to happen to improve water access here?
Translator:	What need to be done is that the leaders we have chosen, they would be the very people to determine whether we need access to water or not. If they look at it in a way that we still need more boreholes, they will sit with us and maybe propose and then if it is yes, they will then maybe go to opinion leaders or maybe go to those who are responsible maybe in helping that and maybe cry on them or to them for them to get help.
Shani Haruna:	Sowho will they go to and ask for that help?
Translator:	I think those people that they will be going to first it maybe the assembly man for the area. And then from then either to the DCE or the MP.
Shani Haruna:	Now how has the brave helped you to increase your income?
Translator:	I didn't know managements or how to manage anytime my money enters into my hands, but through the advice or the education I'm getting from brave, anytime I get money now or when I get some money, I know how to manage. I know that maybe I'll be using it for a very important thing. I will not just spend it any how on, excuse me to say, unnecessary things.
Shani Haruna:	We will like to say thank you for the time that you had with us and for sharing your experiences with us.
Translator:	I appreciate. I also thank you for the knowledge I've also acquired from you. It will help me in my activities.

 
 
 
Shani Haruna:	This interview is with Alem Lucy annon number 004. So we'll like you to state your full name.
302:	My name is 302
Shani Haruna:	And what's your date of birth?
302:	I'm born in 2nd February, 1974
Shani Haruna:	And are you male or female?
302:	I am female.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. do you hold any community position?
302:	Yes. I'm community monitor.
Shani Haruna:	Apart from that do you hold any other position?
302:	No.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	Now we would like you to explain what your understanding of the brave project is. So what is your understanding of that brave project?
302:	Brave is here for about a year now and they're with us helping us to understand more about farm work and then they also ..., we also used to meet and discuss about how we can come together and do well to care for how the climate is now changing to protect our environment.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Then what did you learn about the water under the brave project?
302:	We learn about water because like ... During harvesting of water, like if the water, the rain falls during the rainy season, we will do well to look some things which will contain the water for us to use it during the time there will be no rain.
Shani Haruna:	And what did you learn about groundwater? The water that comes into your boreholes and then the wells that you fetch for your activities.
302:	Okay. We have got boreholes here and some is from World Vision and then we're even having a some boreholes before, wells too. The wells, there are not more water there again. We're now using the boreholes. And even recently we had mechanised borehole again.
Shani Haruna:	So, we're now about to talk about access to weather information and how the information is being used. So how did you find out about the weather last season?
302:	Yes. For the weather we always .... We used to hear information from, eh, eh, weather forecast people. Like sometimes we use to hear information from our phones, sometimes too in radios. That always help us to know how the rain fall pattern will come.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. you said you sometimes get the messages on your phone. Who sends you those messages?
302:	Sometimes it always from ... Is it PAS-G, or I could not remember all but sometimes it used to come from a PAS-G.
Shani Haruna:	Then you also mentioned you sometimes hear it on the radio. Which radio station do you normally hear it from?
302:	Sometime they will come to Quality FM.
Shani Haruna:	Who comes there?
302:	Sometimes, it's Albert. Yes. The mofa officers, they always come to tell us the information in radios.
Shani Haruna:	So apart from the radio, which other places do you get information about the weather from?
302:	Apart from the radio, Like meetings ... Sometimes like the way you people came, they brave program came. They always ... Sometimes they used to bring some specialized person there to come and talk to us.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Okay.
Shani Haruna:	You mentioned you sometimes listen to the radio to get information about the weather. Who owns the radio sets that you listen to?
302:	Doctor Sana.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. what I mean is the radio set. The wireless set. Who owns it? The one that you listen to who is the owner?
302:	My husband
Shani Haruna:	And who uses it most?
302:	He will always use it. Whenever it's news time, he will bring it out and we all listen.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So the agric officers that you mentioned you hear on radio, apart from you hearing them on radio, are you able to get access to them?
302:	Yes. If I want to know something more and contact them, they will tell us.
Shani Haruna:	How do you contact them?
302:	I always go to the office.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. then the season that just ended, how did you find out about the weather? Where did you hear information about the weather?
302:	That one, It always come through our phones. They will tell us that tomorrow, this time there will be rain. Sometimes it could happen. Sometimes too It may not happen, but it can fall somewhere Not all that far. We can hear from some people that rain falls here.
Shani Haruna:	So the weather information is that you received, what changes did you use that information to make in your farming activities?
302:	Yes, for this one it helped us a lot. Like if you are preparing to apply your fertilizer and you know very well that they already said that this time there will be rain, you will not go and apply. You wait until after the rain, you can then apply. And even sometimes when your farm land is far and you want to go and you heard of this information, you will not go. You will wait until or after the rain. You know the time the rain will fall
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So apart from the application of fertilizer and then going to the farm, did you make any changes to the time that you sow your seeds?
302:	Yes.
Shani Haruna:	What did you make to that?
302:	Because they tell us the time the rain will start and the time the rain will end we know the inputs .... Which the early maturing ones, you know that if you sow this time, by this time you can harvest. And so for that one we will not sow the late ones again.
Shani Haruna:	So which varieties did you sow?
302:	The early maturing ones.
Shani Haruna:	How long do they take before they mature?
302:	Sometimes some are three months and some are four months.
Shani Haruna:	What crops?
302:	Maize and then sorghum. But for the rice too, they are also got some which also ...., if you sow that one three months too, you also harvest and some will be about five.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. did you also make changes to when you start sowing? The time that you plant and what changes did you make to the time that you start sowing?
302:	That one Depends on the rainfall pattern. Like if we get the rains fall in time, we also sow in time, but if the rain didn't fall in time, we also sow late.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. so before you heard the weather information which month were you planning to sow your crops?
302:	Like the last year?
Shani Haruna:	Yes. For last year.
302:	We were planning to sow June, May rather. Because of the rain fall some and even not because of only that one, you know, for women like this if the men haven't finished their this thing ...we women have no access to get ... How do you call it? ... The bullocks for them to plough ours so that we will Sow. So they always sow early and we sow later.
Shani Haruna:	So You had planned to sow in May? Then when you heard the information about the weather, which month did you sow?
302:	I sowed July and it was even getting to the ending self.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
302:	June rather, sorry. I sowed June, not July. June.
Shani Haruna:	So what did you hear in the weather information that made you to sow in June rather than May?
302:	Ike, they tell us this time the rain will be fall heavily. This time it will not fall heavy. We heard all those things. This time there will be rain and this time there will be no rain.
Shani Haruna:	So when did you hear the weather information? Which month did you hear it?
302:	Even it was April going or was it May. It seems it started April going.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So for the weather information, what do you think would be the best way for you to receive the weather information in the future?
302:	It's ..., To me it seems the phones is also better. And sometimes too ... Okay. To me, but sometimes too, like some people too they cannot read on phones. So if they also announce it in air, it's also better.
Shani Haruna:	When you to say on air. What do you mean on air?
302:	Like radio stations.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. do you think ... The men and women here, who do you think listen to radio more than the other?
302:	The men listen more than women.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And why do men listen more than women?
302:	Sometimes the time they will give the news maybe by that time women will be still busy.
Shani Haruna:	So, is there a better way that the weather information can be sent so that everybody can have access to it apart from the radio?
302:	Like the phones. If they always come and meet us and talk to us. So that one too, after the meeting, everybody they'll spread it out.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. so do think men have more phones than women here in the community?
302:	Man, having ... No, I don't think that men has more. Okay, for the phones, only that the phones has got difference. The men may have those phones which may take more information than women. Women can ..., they have phones, but they don't have the big phones. Or how am I going to put it? The smart smartphones.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So why are the women not having smart phones?
302:	That one is costly. We ..., It's not easy for us to afford that money.
Shani Haruna:	Then, the agric extension officers. How often do they come here to give information on farming?
302:	In a year time?
Shani Haruna:	Yeah, within a year. How regular do they come? Do they come every month, every week or every two months, or every six months?
302:	Like dry season like this they don't come regularly. But getting to raining season they'll visit us regularly.
Shani Haruna:	So during the raining season how regular do they visit?
302:	Like when it getting to time for us to sow, they will come and advice us how you do the this thing ... And that one I could say once a month or is it twice a month.
Shani Haruna:	And when they come, what information do they provide to you about water management?
302:	They always advise us to take good care of our waters which will help us to do our farming.
Shani Haruna:	So what crops do you grow?
302:	Maize, guinea corn, rice millet.
Shani Haruna:	So the crops that you just mentioned, how did you find out information about them last season?
302:	Information like what?
Shani Haruna:	Like how to plant them. The varieties that you should plant.
302:	It's from mofa people. The mofa officers.
Shani Haruna:	And what did they tell you about the crops?
302:	They tell us the varieties, like this variety will take about this months ... The number of months before it will mature and this variety will also take the number of this months before it will be matured for harvest.
Shani Haruna:	What did they tell you about water requirements of the crops?
302:	No, they didn't tell us.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So for this season, the one that just ended, how did you find out information about your crops?
302:	From agric officers.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And in the future, what do you think is the best way for you to receive such information?
302:	Like if they also ..., they call us for the meeting, like the NGO like this, they also ..., if they also call us for the meeting, that one will also help us.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	So what changes did you make to your farming activities or livestock activities as a result of the information that you heard on the radio?
302:	It helped us a lot because through there we are able to know how we will feed our livestocks. And then we also spread ..., like if we also hear, we also go and inform our neighbors too and they also had the information. We will also ..., they will use it to practice and it'll also help them.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. How did you find it the well monitoring training that you received? Well monitoring. Well monitoring training.
302:	I was not part with them, so because of that I can't best have much about that one information.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And do you think men and women have access to different information?
302:	Like?
Shani Haruna:	Like here, Do men have access to information that women don't have access to?
302:	Okay. Some ..., you know, we ... Like even if they call for meeting, they will call everybody and some meetings they will call only men to have that meeting, but not always.
Shani Haruna:	So what kind of meeting will they call only men?
302:	Okay. Like I can't best .... Like sometimes they will call only the men for that meeting. Like if they want to do something in the community, they will call the men to come and listen for that meeting, before they also spread ..., come back and spread to we the women and we all do it.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So why do they call men first before they come and spread the information to women later?
302:	Okay. Maybe sometimes it's not that meeting may be not part of us. Maybe that meeting will be only the men, but like if it is community meeting, all of us are involved.
Shani Haruna:	And do you think men get more information about water than women?
302:	No. Women. Information Like if there is no water or how? Yes, women felt that one first because we are the people who always go for water.
Shani Haruna:	And does that affect the relationship between men and women?
302:	No, it's not affecting us.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	So we're now going to talk about water use, management and disagreements. So normally, what do you use water for?
302:	We use it for our daily use.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	What exact ... What activities do you use it for?
302:	We use it for cooking, Washing, drinking and washing .... I've already said washing.
Shani Haruna:	Do you use it for farming too?
302:	I like the dams water we use that one for gardens.
Shani Haruna:	So, the activities that you've mentioned, how are you able to plan your water use around those activities?
302:	Like the waters, they have got some .. They selected some people and they're executive. They are taking care of the water. Like the boreholes they have got executive for the boreholes and even the dams too they've got executive who are also taking care of.
Shani Haruna:	So how has the brave project helped you to manage your water better?
302:	Brave program came and taught us how to save water, like rain water. But at first we were not aware that if we safe rain water we can still use that one for dry season. We learn how to ..... They taught us how to save that rain water for dry season work.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And what did you learn about how to manage your water on the farms?
302:	Water ...., like if your farm is running to one place and if rainfall, the water would run to one side. You .... You make bonding and sometimes you farm, ... You also make mulching too which will help you to ... Which will prevent the water destroying your farm products.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. would you say that water usage it results in disagreements? For instance, like the use of the boreholes and then the Wells. Do people always have the disagreements because of that or even the dam?
302:	No, for the ... For the boreholes. And they don't have any disagreement there. Only that the dams sometimes, they will open the water and some people it'll get to them and some people it may not yet get to them. Only that one is there.
Shani Haruna:	So such disagreements, how are they normally resolved?
302:	Oh, they always wait and they will still open it so that later on they'll get it. Like some will get it today and tomorrow they will also get it. If they don't close it, they will still get it.
Shani Haruna:	And at what intervals do they open that dam? How many days intervals?
302:	Three days. Three days.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So in your opinion, what needs to happen to improve water access and management here?
302:	Boreholes, we have no problem in it. Only that the dam water is not all that enough for us to do the farm, the dry season gardening.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	And so what do you think should be done to make the dam water enough for you to do your dry season farming?
302:	Like if the water too ... You know the boreholes, is still ... The boreholes is there, but as we saw the ... One of the mechanized one and that one too is only one here. And it's also not all of us get that water.
Shani Haruna:	So how has brave helped you to improve your income?
302:	Brave came and trained us. At first ... Like they taught us how to manage farm produce and then to do budgeting before we sell. And sometimes too during funerals We do spoil our foods. We prepare the food so much that people will come and they will not be able to finish it. And all those food we have to pour it away. Through their trainings we have now realized that we have to manage things.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So we'll like to thank you so much for your time and for the experiences that you have shared with us. We are so much grateful to you for your time.
302:	Welcome.

 
 
 
Shani Haruna:	This interview annon number 005 with 303.
Translator:	To do the translation from Kusaal to English is me Atirago Kate Atipoka.
Shani Haruna:	So the first thing we would like to know.... We would like to know her full name, date of birth and then whether he's is female or male.
Translator:	My name is 303. I'm 34 years of age and I'm a female.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And do you hold a community position?
Translator:	Yes, I hold a position. I'm the women organizer for the new patriotic party for this community.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Sowe would also like to find out or understand what her understanding of the brave project is.
Translator:	I've learned a lot from this project. For instance, how to do composting or organic manure. Besides that, I've also learned how to do bonding so that there will always be moisture on my farm.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Did they talk to you about water and what did they talk about water?
Translator:	With the brave project I have learned a lot. For instance, I have acquired a new knowledge on how to do bonding so that in case it even rain heavily, it will not spoil my farm. Besides that, I've also learned how to harvest this rain water for usage, especially during dry season.
Shani Haruna:	Did they talk about boreholes or wells? And what did they talk to you about boreholes or wells that are here?
Translator:	Though we were taught how to do dug-outs or boreholes, especially dug-outs on our gardens, but it's unfortunate because we don't have the efforts or we can't afford it's always difficult. Had it not because of that we were taught that when we get like cements and plaster inside the water will be able to be there for a long time for us to be using it on our farms, like especially our watering our gardens.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. What did they tell you about groundwater in the course of the project?
Translator:	We were taught that anytime we dig we should try and build around it so that the water will not be washed away or the water can stay there for some time. At least when we build around it, the water will always be there for maybe the time we may prefer to use.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Then what do use that water for?
Translator:	We use it for our irrigation work especially watering our groundnuts, cabbage and different kinds of vegetables on our gardens.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. At what time of the year do you use those water?
Translator:	The water we harvested or the underground water are finished for now because we started using it in October and for now those waters are no more there but fortunately we have a dam by where our gardens are. So we have connected some pipes in the dam that we are using it for irrigation. So that is what we are using for now. But the underground water has finished.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So we are now I'm going to talk about access to weather information and then how they use such information.
Shani Haruna:	Well would like to know, how did you find out information about the weather last season? How did she find out information about the weather last season?
Translator:	I heard the information from this.... I had an information from radio station and this particular brave project that this particular year or the last season we'll get more rains than the other seasons. But unfortunately to me, I didn't experience that much. Besides that too we were told that there will be thunder, but we didn't experience it like how they were telling us that it would be.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And which radio station did you hear the information from?
Translator:	I have heard the information from about three radio stations, GBC, sunshine and Quality FM.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Soapart from the radio stations, where else do you get information about the weather?
Translator:	Apart from the radio stations I have not heard it anywhere because I cannot read, even if a text message is given to me on the phone, I wouldn't know what it is about.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So, are there groups here where maybe you a member then you can have access to the weather information?
Translator:	Apart from hearing it on the radio, I also get the information from this brave project and sometimes when we meet as group, either I share the information or I can also acquire an information from maybe someone concerning the weather.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So which other groups are you a member of where you share the information or get the information?
Translator:	We also have our VSLA group that sometimes we share the weather information there.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So that was for last season. So for this season, how did he find out information about the weather? Where did you get information about the weather
Translator:	We were told that we'll have medium, like the rain it will not be high. It will be medium. And we were told when to a plant, but unfortunately the rain stopped in the middle and even exceeded the time that they said the rain will stop.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. When did the rain stop?
Translator:	It stopped in the 11th month, that's November.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Is it normal for the rains to stop in November?
Translator:	It's not normal though, but every time depends on God. What happened this season, how It rained it spoilt most of our produce.
Shani Haruna:	So you mentioned you had some information about the weather. What changes did you make as a result of you getting that information in your farming activities or livestock rearing?
Translator:	I have been...... The information I always hear about the weather, the changes is that I always start farming or planting so my crops normally do well because I will listen and use the new varieties that I'm supposed to do. Besides that, when I'm even in the farm and I see to eat that is threatening to rain, I'll make sure I'll call home and whoever is there will make sure that he'll will send or go for the animals in case they are outside.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So we would you to give us some examples of the crops that you changed as a result of you hearing information about the weather; the crops that maybe you decided to sow or not to sow because you heard information about the weather.
Translator:	Earlier I used to farm only millet. But due to the information I've been getting, this season I decided to divide my farm. I planted maize and sorghum and it also did very well due to the time I started planting. Because I heard information that we should plant this particular time and I actually followed and I have gained from it.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. What time did you start the sowing of the sorghum and then the maize?
Translator:	For the sorghum I planted in the sixth month. But for the maize it was in the seventh months. But due to the variety I used, it was able to do well. It yields very well for me.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. What variety did you use? How many days did it take to yield?
Translator:	I bought the variety from agric station. But because it has been long, I can't remember. But it took maximum of 70 days going that I started harvesting.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And that's for both of the maize and then the sorghum?
Translator:	That's for the maize.
Shani Haruna:	How about the sorghum?
Translator:	For that one I didn't calculate the number of days or months it took and I can't also remember the name.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So before you bought those varieties, which varieties were you using and how long were they taking to mature?
Translator:	Before this information from brave I was not even planting maize. It was only millet that I was planting. So I don't have any number of days or variety that I was using. I wasn't planting.
Shani Haruna:	Okay, that's good. So the information that you have been hearing about the weather, in the future what would be the best way for you to receive that information?
Translator:	For the future I think it's just through maybe such a program like the brave project that I can be getting information or through the radio station, or if someone get the information on his or her phone, the person too can share it with me.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. If you say someone gets the information is it a man or a woman who will get such information on the phone and then share with you?
Translator:	The person can either be a male or female. We have children who are educated. So whoever share the information to us is the important thing.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So apart from the radio or the phone, which other source would you like to receive the information from? Are there government institutions or office is where you would want to have such information from?
Translator:	I wish if any institution can share the information with us any time, but I cannot decide because God does his work. If the spirit of God should touch someone whoever comes with the information, I will receive it.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Now, let's talk about the radio that she mentioned. Does she think that men listen to radio more than women? Or women listen to radio more than men?
Translator:	Women listen to radio station more than men because most of the men don't sit at home or they don't sit at one particular place. Though, some do use their phones to listen to radio. But depending on the distance, if it is far away, they may not get the signal through their phones.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Do you think that men have more phones than women?
Translator:	She doesn't think men have phones than women. It may be equal.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So why do you think so?
Translator:	Why I'm saying so is this, one man or a man can have two or more wives and all or both the women will be having phones. Besides that, I can also call my child at wherever she or he is, and he can even add me a phone and I will decide to be using two or to even give one to my child. So women have phones more than men.
Shani Haruna:	That's wonderful. Okay. So do agric extension officers it visit you here?
Translator:	We used to have extension officers who normally visit us, but unfortunately, just this season or last season, we didn't get some. Though sometimes when we call on them, they do listen to us by coming.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So why are they no more coming? Why don't they visit you again?
Translator:	I can't tell. I don't know whether maybe we have done something wrong or maybe we have against a law that they don't want to visit us again. But like those days, anytime we are in our dry season farming or our gardens, they do visit to check on our vegetable. But for now I can't tell why they are not visiting us anymore.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So how long has this been since they last visited?
Translator:	From last two years going they were coming, but last year we didn't see them. For this season have just started so I cannot tell if they will be coming or not.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So when they visit do they normally provide information about water management and then weather?
Translator:	Yes, they do tell us how to manage our water or how to take care of our crops well. For instance, when they talk about the weather, they always come with the varieties that will help us. So normally they even come with different kinds of varieties. For example, for Okro, for carrot and some kind of our vegetables that we farm. So we normally buy the varieties from them. Besides that, they always tell us how to water these vegetables in a proper way.
Shani Haruna:	Okay, that's wonderful. Apart from the brief project, how do they get access to the agric extension offices?
Translator:	That is what I said previously. Those days, they were coming but for the whole of last year we didn't see them apart from maybe they coming through this brave project.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	So now I'm going to talk about access to crop information and then it's use. So the first thing we would like to know is, how did she find out information about her crops last season?
Translator:	I had my information on this brave project. For instance, I had information on how to plough my farm, how to do bonding and different kinds of things that will help me have a good yield.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Apart from those ones what other information did they talk to you about?
Translator:	I've learned a lot on this project. I've learned how to harvest, when to harvest, produce management, storage and different kind of things. I've learned a lot.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. That was for last season. So how did... Where did she get information this season?
Translator:	It's the same this brave project that I had the information from.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And what did they discuss or inform you about? What information did you hear?
Translator:	The information I had this season is not different from last season. I've learned how to manage my farm produce, when to sell and what you sell for. Those days that we were not having any knowledge, we normally sell just to buy clothing for funerals or how we even cook at funeral houses. We used to waste a lot. But from the information from brave, I've learned a lot. I've learned a lot from it.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So in the future what would be the best way for her to receive such information again?
Translator:	I would have been happy if I'll be hearing this information from brave all of the time. But I always say and I will say everything depends on God. Wherever the information comes I will receive it in good faith.
Shani Haruna:	So apart from brave, which other way would she want to receive the information?
Translator:	I wish an information will be coming from agric or MoFA whereby the agric extension officers will be briefing us on this agric programs or crops and rearing.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Then what changes did you make as a result of you getting the information?.
Translator:	Day will break us If I mean to narrate what I have gain from this project. But what I just want to say is before this project, I was not even into farming like that. But immediately this project came, now I farm a lot and I can harvest much.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So are you able to make me give us some examples of the family activities that you did and what you got from those activities?
Translator:	Yeah, there is changes because those days, the farm that I use to plant millet on it, I use not to get up to three basins or more than two basins. But for the information I've gotten, what I did last year was that I planted the millet along side with the maize. And fortunately the maize had about three bags, and the millet I had three basins even including soya beans. But I don't know whether it's the fertiliser or the compost that I have been applying on the farm that made me to harvest like that.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So we are now going to talk about the well monitoring that they did. Did she receive training on well monitoring?
Translator:	I can't remember of having any training on well monitoring.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So we're now going to talk about gender and then access to information. That's how men and women here have access to information differently. So in your opinion, do you think men and women have access to different information?
Translator:	To me it depends. If it is information that women want to hide from men, it maybe the woman who will here only that information. The other side too if it is something that men only want to discuss it within themselves, that information may be denied women. Had it not because of maybe... If not because of this thing I think every information we'll hear it equal.
Shani Haruna:	So what kind of information will women hear and men not hear?
Speaker 2:	I think some of the information that we women hide from men, some may think it is bad information. Well, individual difference, for example, assuming, I'm a woman and I want to go and do family planning. My husband may not allow me if he should here or if I should inform him. So what I'll do is maybe talking or discussing about it to a colleague woman or hiding to go and do it.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Then what kind of information will men only hear and not allow women to hear,
Translator:	The information she thinks men will be hiding from women is when they get money. When they get money, they will not like to let women know. Even if they'll inform them it wouldn't be the exact amount. It may be quarter of the amount that they've gotten.
Shani Haruna:	Do men get more information about water than (wo)men? Or women get more information about water than men?
Translator:	This one depends. Assuming the community is a community that women have more power, I think they're the very people who will hear water information first. If it's also the men who have the power maybe to lobby or be leaders in the community, they'll will be the very people who get such information first.
Shani Haruna:	So here specifically, what is the situation? Is it men who get more information about water or women get more information about water?
Translator:	For this our community, it is the men who get water information first.
Shani Haruna:	So why do they get it first?
Translator:	It is because the men are more civilized and they know the importance of water. So they always fight or make sure wherever they will go to get support of this thing, water for instance, they will make sure they will fight for whoever is responsible for providing water will get them some.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So here, who is responsible for finding water for the household? Is it the man or the woman?
Translator:	It is women who fetch water for the household. But when it happens that a borehole or well is spoilt If a man, or if the men don't add their hands, it won't work for them or they will not solve the issue.
Shani Haruna:	Why wouldn't they solve the issue?
Translator:	We women we don't fear each other. Assuming maybe a borehole spoils and I should inform a colleague, the person may not take it serious because both of us are women, but if a man is involved, they will have that fear. And if it is about contribution or whatever, they will make sure they will work things out.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So she mentioned that men have access to water information more than women. Does that affect the relationship there between men and women?
Translator:	Sometimes it brings misunderstanding between them and the men in the sense that sometimes they come out and oppose an amount for them to contribute. So in that case, it always leads to misunderstanding on the amount to be paid. For instance, if it is not an NGO, and it is maybe government or an association, sometime they are asked to contribute so that they may use that money or sometimes they use that money to buy something like an animal as a gift and give it to those who have dug the borehole for them. Sometimes too they use the money to buy cement and plaster the place.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So who decides how much they pay if they are to make a contribution?
Translator:	I think every community has a leader and it depends on their kind of maybe opportunity they are getting. If it is about water, they have someone who normally lead them. If it is about a different thing that is coming into the community, they also have a leader for that particular opportunity that they may get. So it's always the leader who decides how much they should pay.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So we are now coming to talk about water use, management and then disagreements. What do you use water for?
Translator:	I use water for domestic use, for instance, for drinking, bathing, washing and for my animals to also drink.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So what has allowed her to plan her water use better?
Translator:	For the information from brave I've learned how to manage my water, how to take good care of it. For example, those days, I used not to cover my water anytime I fetch to my container. But for the information I've been hearing I now cover it neatly because I know if I don't treat it well, I may acquire sickness through that.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And then how has the brave project helped you to manage your water better?
Translator:	Now I have different containers that I use to fetch water through the information I've gotten from brave. For instance, what I'm using to drink is different from what I use to cook and what I use to wash. I normally fetch what I used to wash do my washing to the local ports. But for the rubber containers, those one can easily get broken by the sun so because of that, that one is always placed at where there is shade and I maybe first time there that I used to cook in a different place to what I used to drink and I made sure that those ones are well covered.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So what about the sources that you go to fetch the water, like the boreholes or the wells, how has the project helped you to manage those sources, the boreholes and the wells, better?
Translator:	The project have made us to be cleaning wherever we fetch our water very well. For instance, the borehole for instance, we always have days that we do the cleaning. We make sure rubbers, rags or whatever is there that makes it place unpleasant we pick them. Even if we get to know that someone has washed at that place and left a dress or whatever and they are able to detect they make sure they send it to the person and advise the person that next time he should always make sure that he packs all his or her things. So they clean the place very well from the information they had from brave.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And that's okay. And then for the boreholes and then the Wells and even the dam do they have a committee that is responsible for managing them?
Translator:	We have committees for all these projects. Is it the dams, the wells, the boreholes. So for instance, if something is not even going on well and maybe a committee member is not aware, you the one who is a member of the community, you can brief them what is happening and they will sit with them and solve it. In case maybe assuming it is a problem.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So for for a borehole, how many people are in the committee?
Translator:	For the borehole we have about six people or members who are the committee.
Shani Haruna:	What are their roles? What do they do?
Translator:	I think some.... What she is saying, some take care of maintenance. Even If not they themselves, when they detect a fault their in-charge will report to, maybe to whoever is responsible for them to look, a maintenance team. We have organizers in it and we have the sanitation, that's the sama sama people who make sure the places is always neat.
Shani Haruna:	So apart from those ones which other roles do they have?
Translator:	The committee is not only taking care of the boreholes but they also have some aspects or some roles that they play. For instance, if they see someone house being filthy or very dirty, they can call the person and talk to the person to do cleaning. If the person refused, they will insist or they will call the person and sit the person now and advice him or her to make sure that the place is always neat.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So how many people are in the dam committee?
Speaker 2:	I can't really tell, but I think they will be more than twelve in number and sometime they like changing them. Assuming, if someone is not playing his role well, or maybe they call for meeting twice or number of times and the person doesn't attend, they will try to replace someone. So for the number, I think it will be up to 12 or more.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So do you think water usage results in disagreements here?
Translator:	For the water usage it brings a lot of eh, misunderstanding between them, especially the dams where most of them have, their gardens behind. Anytime they open the dam some of them don't have the machines and it is for them to use their hands to be fetching watering. But unfortunately, someone with a machine may be in front of you and the person, some people are having the water pumping machines or their pipes which are connected to their farm. So anytime they open the dams, they always block the water and have to water all their garden and you will be behind them waiting for the water to even come small and you use your hand to fetch or your guide or what ever to water and you will not be getting the opportunity. So if you should move in front to realize that it is the one who have the pumping machine who have blocked it, what will come from your mouth, it wouldn't be good because you have also wasted time and the person is wasting your time.
Shani Haruna:	So how do you normally deal with such situations?
Translator:	What they normally do is this, after that when they see each other they greet, if they greet and you don't respond, that is it. If you think the fault is not coming from you, you wouldn't have a problem. But how I normally do to know whether the fault is coming from me or not is that when it happens like that, I always call a witness to come and witness or see. If the person comes and I realize that what the person is saying is also against the person, then I will know definitely I am right. So if I greet the person, he doesn't respond, that is it. If she responds, then that means the problem is solved.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So the people who are in charge of managing the dam, are they able to solve such issues?
Translator:	It depends. If it is a big issue, something we can't solve it there, we'll always make sure the information gets to them. When it gets to them they call us to sit us down. But if it is mere one, we ourselves will just solve it in the farm and that will be all.
Shani Haruna:	So how about the boreholes and the wells are there disagreements around those ones too?.
Translator:	They also have misunderstanding there, but it's not much as compared to the dams. But normally this happen between the children. But for the grownups it's just... It's not much. It's just sometime small. For instance, if they have understanding, but when it happens that maybe you are having two jerrycans that you want to fetch both and you cannot carry both to the house and it is that carrying one and leaving one and going to come back and she will be standing. That one, she won't agree. You have to fetch one, go and come back and fetch. Because if you are a fetching two make sure you carry the two all and go
Shani Haruna:	So how has the brave project helped in resolving some of the disagreements?
Speaker 2:	What the project have helped us resolving, dealing with such issues is that I have heard the information. So even if a colleague or my friend, don't have any knowledge or information from the brave and we have gone to the borehole to fetch and maybe the person wants to cause that disagreements, I will just calm myself down and maybe comport myself and just ignore for the person to do whatever she or he wants. And after that I'll also fetch my water.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Then since the project started has the way you've been using water... The way you make decisions on how to or what to use the water for, are there changes in the decisions that you make regarding how you use water?
Translator:	Yeah, there are changes. For instance, when I had information from brave or what I've learned through this project is that, I now know how to manage. For instance, if there is a quantity of water that I would have misused one day, I will know that the water will be value to me the next day. So I will be able to manage with it, that it will remain and I will use it the next day for something else. But I won't waste it just one particular day.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So how has the brave helped you to increase your income and then assets?
Translator:	I've learned a lot in a way that it gives me income. For instance, those days, I used not to farm much, but now I cultivate more and besides that I don't sell like how I used to sell. For instance, those days, if I hear that there's a funeral somewhere, I always sell to go and buy a cloth, a uniform, funeral uniform. But this time I don't do those things. I'll make sure I'll keep the produce for the time that I think there will be markets, high markets that I will then sell. Even if there is no market I'll wait till maybe the next season again, I will not waste it.
Shani Haruna:	So what needs to happen to improve water access here?
Translator:	If the dams can be rehabilitated then it will help us. For instance, our community dam here when you get there though there is water but inside it is not deep. You can just maybe go through and even cross. It's not deep. So if they are able to rehabilitate then there will be having enough water all the time. Besides that, if they can also help them with number of boreholes so that it will be easy for them to access water and it wouldn't be like going to queue all the time to get water for your domestic use.
Shani Haruna:	Now. The very last question. How would you want the local district assembly to help in water management?
Translator:	Yeah. The assembly supporting us with money or giving us money is something that will finish within a shortest possible time. For instance, if there is a funeral somewhere and maybe they are going to sympathize with them, sometime they give money. She would prefer that money or such money should be given to them or use the money to rehabilitate the dam or maybe expand the number of boreholes within the communities for them.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So we would like to thank you so much for your time and then the information that you have shared with us.
Translator:	She also appreciates and she's tanking both of us for the time we have gotten for her to also share her knowledge. She appreciates.
Speaker 3:	Okay.



 
 
 
Shani Haruna:	This is interview with 304. Annon number 006. So the first thing we would like to know about her, is to know her full name.
Translator:	I am Atirago Kate Atipoaka. On behalf of 304 I'm going to do the translation in Kusaal to English.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Translator:	Her name is 304.
Shani Haruna:	What is her date of birth?
Translator:	I can't tell my date of birth.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Then how old is she now?
Translator:	50 years of age.
Shani Haruna:	Is she male or female?
Translator:	She's a female.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And does she hold a position here in the community?
Translator:	I don't hold any position.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. The other thing we would like to know is to we would like to know what her understanding of the brave project is. What is her understanding of the brave project? Or what does she know about the brave project?
Translator:	I have learnt to know different varieties through the brave project and the proper way of taking care of my animals in rearing.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So what did you learn about water under the brave project?
Translator:	I've learned how to harvest water though, but my challenge is how to, how to get containers for the harvesting. I only have some pots or just some few containers that anytime it's raining I always store water in that and maybe later I can use it for household chores and maybe for my animals to be taking or drinking anytime there is shortage of water.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. The next part of our discussion is centered around access to weather information and how they use the information in their farming activities. So in this session the first thing we'd like to know is how did she find out information about the weather last season.
Translator:	I always get the information from the Gmet and sometimes listen to the brave project on GBC. I always get information there concerning the weather.
Shani Haruna:	You mentioned you get information from the gmet. How do they send the information to you
Translator:	We get the information from Gmet anytime we meet on the brave project. Sometimes they say they send messages to our phones, but unfortunately I don't have one. So I always hear the information from them on field or from the GBC radio station.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So apart from the Gmet you mentioned you also get information from the brave project. How do they bring how do you, how do they bring the information to you?
Translator:	Uh what she's saying is, eh, anytime the group always come with a Gmet official to the community, she always get the information there and the group too they have a leader. So normally when she receives a message or messages from gmet, anytime they always meet, he try, he tries to explain to them, eh, what he have gotten about the weather.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So apart from the gmet and then the brave project, does she have access to other sources where she can get weather information.
Translator:	Because I'm not an educated person it's always through the brave project, which is always in the local dialect that I get the information from, and any time the Gmet official comes and they explain to me, that's where I always get the information. Apart from that, I don't have any source that I get information from.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. are there farmer groups here farmer groups here where she is a member that she's able to get information about the weather from?
Translator:	Yeah. it's only the, the VSLA that I'm part where we do our weekly contribution towards our living.
Speaker 4:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	Then discussions we've had so far was about a last season. So we are now going to talk about this season, the farming season that just ended. How did she find out information about the weather?
Translator:	The information I normally get is not different from what I had on the previous years. We always get the information from the Gmet on the varieties that we should be using and how the season will go, whether it will rain normal, I will always hear whether the season it will rain normal, average or high. So it's through the radio station and what we always get from the group discussion. That's where I always get the information from.
Shani Haruna:	So what changes did you make as a result of you getting the weather information?
Translator:	The changes I've made is that when I wasn't hearing any information from radio or gmet, I used to have my own grains that I do sow or plant during rainy season. But for the information that have gotten or I've been getting, it helps me to know the variety to use because I will hear the information, how the duration of the season will be. And I've made a lot of changes, eh, due to that, because I can now harvest much, or I harvest much more than previously when I was not getting any information from the weather.
Shani Haruna:	Is she able to give us maybe an estimate of the yields that she made this year as compared to the other years?
Translator:	For instance, the rice I used to harvest I always get like two basins. But for the information i have gotten, on the same plots, eh, I have up to two bags. But for the maize I use not to be farming maize. It was the millets and those days, the men will not even allow you to even, eh, maybe grade it to know the quantity. But for the maize due to the information that we had I farm and I had about two bags, eh, two bags of the grains.
Shani Haruna:	So we are now going to talk about how best they will like to receive the weather information in the future. So in the future, what would be the best way for her to receive weather information?
Translator:	Apart from if the program continues for us to be getting the information on air and maybe coming here to brief us, I don't think I'll have any other alternative of getting information.
Shani Haruna:	And uh, does she think that men listen to radio more than women?
Translator:	To my opinion women listen to radio more than men.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So why is that so? Why do women listen to radio more than men?
Translator:	Women like learning new things. So for that matter they are always on their radio sets to listen to what is happening. But for the men, for instance, most of them don't have time to even sit by the radio sets to listen to what is going on.
Shani Haruna:	So, normally who owns the radio sets?
Translator:	Men used to own it all, but for now, eh, woman are having theirs and the men too are having theirs.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And that's nice. So apart from the radio, does she think there's another medium where they can send the weather information to her and she will be happy with it, or it will be more useful to her?
Translator:	It's only on the radio that I think I will be comfortable because I'm not educated. So I don't even have a phone. Besides that even if I have, and they give me a text message, I wouldn't be able to know what they are trying to say.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So are there other government agencies here in the districts where such information, they could pass it to her?
Translator:	Sometimes they always organize a meeting and call on the agric extension officers who comes to explain to us, eh, on the weather forecast about the season.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Who organises that meeting?
Translator:	Normally we have a community leader who always invite us that there will be a general meeting and we also have your community radio that they do announce on that anytime they want to meet us on such a discussion.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. that's fine. Does she think men have more phones than women in the community?
Translator:	I believe that men have phones more than women. Besides that they use quality phones because for her, apart from receiving a call she cannot use the phone for any other thing.
Shani Haruna:	So why do they have more phones and quality phones more than women?
Translator:	The reason being that most of the men have hand works than women. Though, some of the women too have those screen touch but they are just a few.
Shani Haruna:	So why are the men having more work than women?
Translator:	The reason is that most of the men are government workers. Some are teachers. Some have gotten the opportunity to join the fire service. Some have joined zoom lion. But for women I think it's just a few who have gotten the opportunity to those places. That's why I think they have more job than we the women.
Shani Haruna:	So, those men who have joined government offices, it appears maybe they are more educated in a way. So is it the case that the men are more educated than women?
Translator:	The men take their education seriously than women. For instance, a guy can even be in school, marry and go back to school, but the woman when you happen to give birth, the person will not agree to go back to the classroom. So the ladies or the women don't take their education serious as compared to the men.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And then, she mentioned something about the agric extension officer where she said sometimes the opinion leaders will organise a meeting and then invite the agric extension officers for the meeting. Sodo the extension officers give them .... At such meetings, do the extension officers give them information about water management?
Translator:	Apart from getting the water management from the brave project, the extension officers don't talk or teach us on how to manage water.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So what do they talk to you about at such meetings?
Translator:	Anyway, I said i have not been getting any information concerning the water management from the extension officers because it's not all the time that I've been attending the meeting. But those meetings that I've attended it's always on good farming practices that I've been taught and how to..... On good farming practices, about new varieties, when to plant, when to harvest so that I can get good yield.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Do they talk to them about the weather?
Translator:	What they normally ask us to be doing is when to plant the variety, how to use insecticides or good spraying methods. That's what they've been discussing much or telling us much to be doing.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So would they like to get weather information from the extension officers? Like if the extension officers were to bring them weather information would they be happy with it?
Translator:	I would have been happy if they were doing so.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So how do you access the agric extension officers when brave is not there?
Translator:	Had it not been because of this brave project for me, I wasn't hearing any information from them. I don't know if I even need something or if I need any information or if I want to know something concerning my farming or my rearing I don't know anybody to go to. So I'm always there.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So, we are now coming to discuss about access to crop information and then how they use the information. So first we would like to know how did she find out information about her crops last season? For instance, if the crops were not doing well or had a disease. How did she find out?
Translator:	For me, where I normally get my information concerning my crops is just from this brave project. Apart from this, I use not to get any information anywhere.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. You mentioned about extension workers. Did they come to give you information about your crops? Or what did they discuss with you?
Translator:	For the extension officers, they always come and give us the information before we even start planting. Any way, if they have been saying sometimes I can't tell because it's not all the meetings that I have been attending.
Shani Haruna:	So how often do the extension officers visit?
Translator:	For last year, they didn't call for any meeting apart from the brave project that I normally attend to maybe get an information there. Though there's one agric worker too who has been discussing something of that nature on radio stations.... One radio station in town here and sometimes when I open I get an information from it.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And which radio station is that? Is she able to mention the name of the radio station?
Translator:	Okay. I get the information sometime from Quality and eh, GBC URA radio. But GBC sometimes I struggle to get that one because I don't know numbers to look at the frequency to tune in to get that this thing.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So how did she find out information about her crops this season?
Translator:	I had the information from the brave project on how to do composting, how to apply fertilizer, how to use organic fertilizer and a lot. So it's on the brave project that I've been getting the information.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Now in the future, what would be the best way for her to receive such information?
Translator:	I think if I have a radio set and always listen to radio concerning the farming information, that's where I think it will help me. So if I continue having a radio, I think it would be the best way of helping me get information concerning agric.
Shani Haruna:	Then apart from the radio, which other source would you be happy to get the information from?
Translator:	Assuming we get experts talking to us all the time or coming to the community to be meeting us especially like what we are doing for the brief project for now. If he should explain to me the good practice and I accept it or I follow it, I think is something that will help me.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So did you make any changes to your farming or livestock activities as a result of the information that you heard on that radio?
Translator:	I've learned a lot concerning the information I've been getting. I learned a lot on post-harvest management, good storage practice even how to get markets for my produce any time I want to sell. On the aspect of the animals I think I always do hay and silage that's, I've been using it to feed them most of the time, especially during the time that there will not be grass for them to graze on it. I also store water in the way that I've been using it to give it to them. So normally it helps them anytime they are tasty or hungry, when they even go out they will be back to the house back to the house for proper management.
Shani Haruna:	So with farming we would like you to give us some examples of the changes that you made on your farm.
Translator:	For the rice for instance, what I normally do is anytime I realize that it's ready for harvesting, I do that earlier. I don't wait for it to dry on the farm before I pick them to the house. I harvest it early, go and dry it at home. When it is dry, I thresh it and then get a proper bag and store it. When it is well dried, that's what I do. I store it in proper bags and keep them.
Shani Haruna:	So we are now coming to talk about well monitoring. The project organised a well monitoring training. So how did you find that well monitoring training that you received?
Translator:	I wasn't part of any training concerning the well monitoring, so I don't have any information on that.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So we are now going to talk about gender and then access to general information here in Tariganga. Do you think men and women have access to different information?
Translator:	For me, I can't tell because I don't know what my colleagues listen to, the kind of information they listen to.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So assuming that somebody is bringing some new information herewho do you think will have access to that information first?
Translator:	I think we women always get the information or we women will get the information first.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So why do women get the information first before men?
Translator:	Unlike men women like sitting in groups like three or four. So anytime an information comes, I think we women always get it first. Besides that, even if I should hear, I like sharing or women like sharing information. So that's why I said, I think women will be the first people to hear any time there's an information.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So what kind of information do women get before men?
Translator:	Assuming if it is an NGO or maybe an organization or maybe an association coming to maybe meet the community members, for this one I think is the women who will hear the information first.
Shani Haruna:	So why is that so?
Translator:	Women like discussing or conversation.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Then that's fine. Do men get more information about water than women?
Translator:	Though for the water aspect the men always have the information first but because it's we women who fetch water anytime they come home to tell us that maybe there's an information that we'll get water we always try to encourage them or push them in a way that they will do any other means of maybe we getting it time.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So, the access of men to the water information before women, does it lead to .... Does it affect the relationship between men and women?
Translator:	It doesn't spoil any relationship because when they get information to.... When they get the information and inform you it is a good thing that is coming to both of us. So it doesn't spoil any relationship.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. That's good. Okay. So we are now coming to talk about water use planning, management and conflicts. Yeah. So the first thing we would like to know is that what has allowed her to plan her water use better?
Translator:	It is women who normally go to fetch water. So anytime they fetch they manage it in a way that it will be quality, they will make sure it is always neat for consumption and also manage it so that they wouldn't be using their energy all the time to go and be fetching water.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So how has she changed how she uses water because of the reasons that she just gave?.
Translator:	It's just through the education, that education that I had on the brave project. That's why I've decided to adopt those changes.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So now how has the brave helped you to manage your water better?
Translator:	The information or the education I've gotten from brave is how they have been asking us to clean our containers any time we want to harvest or fetch water, how to cover it and when and how to use it. That is what I've learned from it.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. so how about the whole community, how has the project helped them to be able to manage their boreholes and then wells?
Translator:	For the boreholes, we are taught to be cleaning it all the time, sweeping around. The same thing applies to the well. For the well we can't even clean the inside but we should make sure the environment is always clean and neat. It should always be clean and neat. So that whenever you're going to fetch you feel comfortable of going to a place like that to get your drinking water or water for usage.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. that's nice. Okay. Sothe boreholes and then the wells, do they have a body in place that helps in managing the boreholes and then the Wells?
Translator:	I can't tell for all the boreholes or the wells but for some I know we have organization that always take care or comes to monitor how active or how they are using it.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Which organization is that?
Translator:	For instance, World vision have given us a borehole. So for that one they always come to monitor to see how it is, in terms of whether it's use. World Vision normally comes to check whether it is in use and how they are taking good care of the environments, I mean within where the borehole is.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So the organization you mentioned is an organization that is coming from outside. So, now what we want to know is within here (community) are there groups or associations that help in managing the boreholes or wells?
Translator:	We have. I think the NGO or the World Vision for instance made us to choose three people who will be taking care of the borehole. The one in charge of cleaning, the one in charge of maybe making sure the place is always neat, the organizer and the one who be looking at the maintenance in case maybe there's a fault then he will report. But unfortunately, the one who was in charge of maybe making sure the place is always clean is no more. But the organizer and the one in terms of the maintenance, they are around. So anytime there is a meeting the organizer, always make sure he will call for the community to come out and listen to what the NGO or the World Vission have for them.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So is it the same for all the other boreholes?
Translator:	I think it's not different from the other boreholes. We also have community members who normally make sure things are in order.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So how did they choose the people who are in charge of making sure the boreholes are working?
Translator:	It is the community members who always decides to select their leaders. Normally what they look is or what they consider is those who are always closer to where the borehole is. They make sure that maybe if it is in front of someone house, either the person will be the one monitoring or the organizer, and the one who will also make sure there will be cleaning is not always far from the place too. So normally they look at the distance, those who are closer to where the borehole is, they are the very people the community members always decide to choose.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So would you like the district assembly to help with what water management?
Translator:	I would have been happy if they are also helping monitoring or managing the water.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So how would you want them to do that?
Translator:	If they are always helping managing eh, eh, they will be able to detect like where there's no water, I mean the community there is no water so that they will also make sure that those people too get theirs.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So would you say water usage sometimes results in the disagreements?
Translator:	Water usage sometimes lead to disagreement because they always cue, and sometimes when you come and meet me and you will want to fetch before me, I wouldn't take it easy. Sometimes too people use their basins or whatever they want to use to fetch to put it in the queue and they do that.... Some people will do that and go back to the house. So, when you come and realize that they have pushed yours or they've sent yours back, you will not also be happy. So, things like this always lead to misunderstanding between some of them.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So how has the brave project helped in improving these disagreements?
Translator:	Normally it's because we are always many at the borehole that leads to these disagreements. So what I normally do is this, when I get up in the morning and go to my garden, when I return in the afternoon that is the time I normally fetch my water because normally it's always in the morning and the evening that people always want to fetch, and that time they are always many. This is what always leads to the misunderstanding or disagreement between people. So, I always time and I realize that most at times in the afternoon, people are not always there. So that's the time I fetch my water from the information I normally hear from brave project.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So, would you like to invest in digging your own well?
Translator:	I would have been glad if I should get the opportunity to have my own well.
Shani Haruna:	Why?
Translator:	You can be insulted by someone you are older than, or someone you can even give birth to the person just because I've gone to a public borehole to fetch. But if I have my own, I don't think these things can happen to me.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. That's okay. So, what would you use your own well for if you were to dig a well?
Translator:	I would have been using it for domestic use in terms of cooking and drinking an even using it to also feed or I'll be .... My animals will also be drinking from it.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So besides that, are there other uses that you would use it for?
Translator:	Okay. Apart from the drinking the Bathing or also fetching for my animals to drink I don't think I'll be using it for any other thing for now.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So, what needs to happen to improve water access here?
Translator:	Assuming we get the opportunity to have more boreholes, wells and probably polytanks to always harvest rainwater during raining seasons, it will be good news because we will not be battling for water again because I think if it is abundant or if every community has, it will always be easy to access, which we'll be happy, which will bring happiness to us.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Has water use decision making process changed since the brave started? Water use decisions, have they changed?
Translator:	The change is that we always harvest or I always harvest the water and now I do manage how to use it. The additional thing is that, though we those who are having gardens always come together to dig. But unfortunately, due to the nature or the difficulties in it, one person doesn't own it. It's just the capacity that we don't.... We are not able to harvest or harvest but, there's change or we have improved on how we have been using water.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And then how has the brave helped you to improve on your income and assets?
Translator:	I have learned produce management on this brave project. Those days I didn't know how to manage my produce well. So anytime I even want to sell the quality is not always there. But due to this project I know how to manage for my products or my grains always look unique, and I don't also sell it in time like how I used to do. So, I will wait for the time there will be markets or the market prices will be high then I will then sell. Besides that, due to how I take care of the produce when I get to the market, it'll attract customers because of the unique nature of how I manage it.
Shani Haruna:	So, we will like to say thank you for speaking with us. We're so happy to speak with you and for you sharing your knowledge with us.
Translator:	She also appreciates your time for this interview and for you also appreciating her for making her to know that she also have an important thing to share.

 
 
 
Shani Haruna:	This is interview with Mr. 305, annon number 008. So sir we would like to know your full name, date of birth, and whether you are male or female.
305	I am a male. I am 15 September 49 born. What, what else did you say?
Shani Haruna:	What's your name? Your full name?
305	Full name is 305.  305 is my first name.
Shani Haruna:	And do you hold any community position here?
305	I am an elder in the chief's palace and well I look like a leader in the organization. So I'm the coordinator of some of these activities or groups.
Shani Haruna:	And besides that are there other roles that you play? What other positions do you hold?
305	Committees like the school management committee, the health committee, I serve in some of these committees.
Shani Haruna:	Okay sir. That's good to know now. So sir, the other thing we would like to know is what is your understanding of the brave project?
305	The brave project, My understanding is water management, climate change effect on our farming processes and the studies and observations you are supposed to understand and Cope up with the challenges that are attached to it.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So what did you learn about water under the brave project?
305	Water we learn about water sources management of the water sources to reduce contamination. Then the use of water for both animals and humans. We learn about it and water .... What do you call it ... Water harvesting or some other sources of water. Water harvesting, ponds, boreholes and hand-dug Wells. We learned about all these things and their management.
Shani Haruna:	Thenwhat other thing did you learn apart from the water under the brave project?
305	Yeah, as I've said, we have so much challenges with our farming processes and this we are told, it is the effect of climate change. And, we have been taken round how we should also cope up with this knowledge to cope up with our lives, say using other varieties of crops that can withstand either the short rainy season or the drought or the two when there are floods. We learn about all those things.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So what did you learn about groundwater under the brave project?
305	Groundwater basically is the hand-dug Wells and boreholes. We learned you need to make feasibility studies and know where you can get the water table. Then you also have to management water so that it will remain wholesome for consumption. They did .... The environment must be clean. That is what we've also learned about groundwater.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. we are now coming to talk about access to weather information and how you use it in your farming activities. Yeah. So the first thing we'd like to discuss is, how did you find out information about the weather last season? That's the last season, the previous one before the one that just ended.
305	We get our information from our agric directorate, the district agric office. Then from gmet. Some of us, they have linked us and gmet gives the forecast in our phones.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And besides the gmet and then the agric office, which other sources do you get weather information from?
305	We get it from other farmers ... Co-Farmers. People will observe and they are able to forecast that it could be this or that or that. And that is also another good source. It's not .... We don't neglect it.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And are there other sources apart from the farmers too? Do you have groups or associations where you are a member andyou receive weather information from such groups?
305	Yes. We have those groups. We have a World Vision. We have CARE, we have SEND Ghana. We have a lot of these NGOs. They also interact with us. Those who help us give us funds or other educational help at schools, at the health clinic, we also get information from all these groups.
Shani Haruna:	Then you mentioned that you get weather information from the agric office. How do they send you the information?
305	Yeah, they sent direct. They have field workers and when they come round to meet farmers to advise them on new methods of doing farming they pass these messages?
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Do you also get weather information from the radio?
305	Yes. We get weather information from the radio, but that is scarce because some of us are not always with the radio. So we have weather forecast which comes from the national studio? Yes. We also get information from them.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	So the discussion we've had is about the previous season. So we're now ... We're now going to talk about this past season. With that one too, How did you find out information about the weather in this past season?
305	Yeah. The forecast we get from gmet and other farmers or agric office or whichever, the forecast seemed to be a good percentage right ... A good percentage right. The only slight difference was the last rains. Forecast was that by mid-October rains might have ceased, but it extended up to the end of October. Yes.
Shani Haruna:	So basically it's the same sources that you got the information?
305	Yes.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Sothe information ... The weather information that you got what changes did you do in your farming activities because you got those information? The weather information.
305	Yeah, there are a lot of changes we have adopt due to that information. The planting seasons we had to time a little better than we used to. Then activities involving the whole planting system, harvesting, drying and to what of not. Then change of varieties of crops, like I used to be mainly on guine corn, millet, but I have changed to corn far, far more than the guinea corn or the traditional crops. I have also changed to beans which use not to be my major crop. So we have changed a number of varieties of crops and the time period too I think it's appropriate for us due to the fact that we have all these informations.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. so with regard to the sowing time, what specific changes have you made because you got information about the weather?
305	The sowing time, like I had to stop the millet and guinea corn because compared to previous years, the sowing time ... Those millet and guinea corn had passed. So I had to rather increase my corn.
Shani Haruna:	When were ... Before the information at what time were you doing your sowing?
305	Before the information we used to sow the millet late April up to June. But the recent information we sow the first week of July ... We sow the first week of July. Otherwise the last sowing used to be sixth June. But even getting to the end of June, there were no rains. So you have to adopt to change early variety maturing crops.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So the new varieties that you mentioned, what makes them ... Or why did you have to adopt the new varieties?
305	Because they will use shorter period and that shorter period, with the forecast, there will be moisture within that period. So from early July to late September some of these varieties will mature. The beans and the corn they will mature.
Shani Haruna:	The maize ... The maize varieties on the average, how many days do they take to mature?
305	On the average, the earliest one we have here is 74 days. So I use those ones and some of them are close. We also have seven-five, then those that take 90 days. But I think I use the seventy-four days.
Shani Haruna:	How about the beans? How many days do they take to mature?
305	Yeah, the beans too is just around 65, 67 days and they are mature.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Sothe weather information that you received, in the future, what will be the best way for you to receive that information?
305	The best way, is if radio method, it can be localized. Like, if they enforce our receptions at local level, I think that might be the best way. And then some key farmers maybe could also be made by way of sending it through their phones. They can also spread. At time we learn to do things from somebody who has done it and has succeeded. And so if there are key farmers who they will give them the information direct it also keep them spreading to others.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. are there other ways apart from the ones that you have mentioned?
305	The other ways may be from one another ... The farmers. But as I've said, the farmers need edcuation. I don't know exactly what to say about how farmers can be informed. Maybe farmers too should be orientated by orientation courses so that they will get to know these things. And some of these traditional beliefs maybe will be subtracting and throwing them away.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	Soyou mentioned sometimes you get information from the radio. In your opinion do you think men listen to radio more than women, or women listen to radio more than men?
305	Men listen to radio more than the women.
Shani Haruna:	Why is that so? Why do men listen to radio more than women?
305	I really cannot tell, but more men have radios than women, and the women maybe they are probably more occupied working out in the field than men. And when they are even in the house, doing the household chores, they seem not to have time to attend to the radio.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Then why do men have more radios than women?
305	They're more resourceful than the women. Even if a woman has a property, like say fowls or goats or something like that, the men still control it. Yes. But the women do not have that ... What do you call it ... Reciprocal control. So that is a probably why.
Shani Haruna:	And why is that the case that men control the properties of women, but women can not control the properties of men?
305	From history, men are more physique and can withstand these heavy heavy activities and it cultured right from the start that man is the head of the family. Maybe that too will be that cultural bond.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Then do you also think that men have more phones than women here?
305	It look like it is equal now as far as phones are concerned, because even the young young girlss, they own phones maybe because of the music they can get from it, but not probably better information. So it looked like the women have more phones than men.
Shani Haruna:	And why is that ... Why do women have more phones than men?
305	I think they like the entertainment they get from the phones and well, men seem not to care about this entertainment.
Shani Haruna:	And how often do agric extension visit you to give you information about your farming activities?
305	It's relative. The agric officers, we have an officer for a zone, for some communities. And it is a daily work. The times he will go round and come to you as an individual may depend. Some farmers have got ... When they see that you are involved in some activity of interest, they may frequent you more than the other. So in the season at least, or throughout the year the agric extension officer can see you about 10 times.
Shani Haruna:	How about .... How often do they meet the whole community as a group,
305	That one is not easy to call a whole community, but just smaller groups, they meet them, especially when they are trying ... What they term it ... The trial farms, they meet those people as a group as often as possible. But to call the whole community ... Like you talk of Tariganga here, the community is large. If you call you a whole community group the attendance, you won't appreciate it.
Shani Haruna:	And then the small groups that you mentioned, the trials groups .... Do the extension workers give information about water management in such groups? Do they give information about how to manage your water in such groups?
305	Yes. They do so. They do so. How to manage water and then the other information of the new varieties and current government policies attached to say farming that season, fertilizers supplies, inputs ... Other inputs, they feed the farmers with these information.
Shani Haruna:	Sowhat information do they normally give about water management?
305	When they look at your farm or where the demonstration plot is, they relate it to how you'll put bondings or the way you should plough it, the way you should put bondings or what do you call it ... Barriers to control the flow of rainwater or to retain moisture more effectively. They teach all these things.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And what do they normally tell you about the weather at such meetings?
Speaker 2:	Yeah, just as I've said, they will tell you the weather forecast from the national radio because not many farmers get that weather information from the national radio, and maybe wherever they also get information on the weather they tell you. Then the climate change, they suggest to farmers why they think the change is, and they use that as a basis to tell them why it is also necessary to change their cropping or farming practices.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. then how do you normally get access to the agric extension officers?
305	Of recent it's the phones or else you have to go to the office and give a report to the director. If the field officer is somewhere he will tell the field officer later on that this person has come or this community has sent for you.
Shani Haruna:	And would you be happy to receive information about the weather or water management from the agric extension officers?
305	Oh yeah. It's welcome. We'll happy to receive any message from them. Of course, it must be positive and I don't hope some technical person will come and give you negative messages.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So we are now coming to talk about access to crop information and how you use those information. So what crops do you normally farm?
305	I normally do guinea corn, millett and maize, but of recent, I've added these cowpea just because of the short period of the rains.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So the crops that you mentioned, how did you find out information about them last season?
305	Yes. the information I visited Manga research twice. So we also get information from the research station. Yes.
Shani Haruna:	Apart from Manga, where else do you get information?
305	Yeah, we also .... Our main information is from MoFA. Agric office. Yes.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Then this season too, How did you find information about them?
305	It's normal, the same sources.
Shani Haruna:	And in the future, what would be the best way for you to receive such information?
305	Yeah, the best way is if it is through radio and if the radio enforcement can come at local level, because the national information at times we don't catch it clear. Yeah. The national radio at times we cannot catch it.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. the crops that you mentioned and sources that you said you get those information from, what information do they give you about the crops?
305	Yeah, they tell you the different varieties, their durations and their planting distances and their ... The weedicides for each of these plants. This information, they feed us and maybe the quantity of fertilizer you should apply when it's applicable. Yeah.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. do they tell you something about the water requirements of the crops?
305	Exactly. That is also added. Water requirement of your crop is added and this water requirement, it depends upon ... You have to look at your land so that you don't put a crop that retention of water is high which can disturb it or retention of water is low which could also affect it. They teach us all these things. Yeah.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Sofrom the information that you received from the MoFA, then the agric station the manga research station ... What .... Did you make any changes to your farming activities as a result of you receiving those information?
305	Yes. as for ... We adopt those methods, except that there are difficulties. You cannot follow it strictly 100%. But that is the ... The new information we receive we are adopting it and I think there is improvement on our yields when we compare to some years back.
Shani Haruna:	Then you also mentioned you've been hearing some information about the radio ... From the radio. Did you make any changes as a result of your listening to the radio programs?
305	Yes, all information I have personally used made effective use of them and as I've said, there are also challenges. You cannot adopt the information ... All the information they have given you because when you are to do it, you need to have collaboration from your family members or neighbours and a they may not too understand it or they may look at it to be painful ... To be labourous. Those are the challenges, but I personally, I try to effect the information I gain.
Shani Haruna:	Are you able to give us some specific examples of the changes that you've made?
305	One specific example is, the army fall worms, or how do you call it. They told us when to spray. At first we thought you could just spray on the leaves and ... But they told us that they fall on the ground at dawn or at dusk. So that is the time you should spray and they can die and will not be able to climb the plant or to drop from the branch to the floor. I tried it this season and it was effective or else we use just spray on the leaves and it doesn't make any change. The other issue weedicide and beans. I use the weedicide and the beans and I didn't use the hoe again. It was effective. Yes.
Shani Haruna:	What did you use the weedicide to do?
305	Yeah the weedecide, with the beans, I sprayed the beans farm with only weedicide, we didn't use a hoe or cutlass to remove the weeds.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	So, we're now coming to talk about the well monitoring training and how you used the information. How did you find the well monitoring training that you received?
305	I didn't ... As a coordinator of the community, I invited or I involve in the communities using the well water to cooperate with those who were within the training group. But honestly, I didn't get directly involved in the training.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. then that's fine. So we are now about to talk about gender and then access to information here. In your opinion, do you think men and women have access to different information?
305	Oh yes. Men or women, they have .... What do you mean by different information? They have access to information. Who are those who have more access than who? I would say the men have more access. And alternatively, when the women have the access to that very information they put it effectively than the men.
Shani Haruna:	When you say they put it effectively than man, what does that mean?
305	They will want to adopt and they will want to practice that new information. But the men ... They hardly want to change or the will change after persistence, persistence. Yes.
Shani Haruna:	Then you said men have more information than women. Why is that so?
305	They are more exposed to the outside than the women. The women are much much more within the community or within the house.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And why the men more exposed than the women?
305	It could be cultural background and it is not easy to change the culture like that. It could be from our cultural background.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. then do you also think that men get more information about water than women?
305	About water, yeah, I think ... You know, their information is equal. As far as water is concerned their information is equal. But as I've repeatedly said, the women fetch water and use water more than men. So their attention to water is far, far better than men. Yes.
Shani Haruna:	So what do you think? Men have ... Women have more access to water information than men? Or men have more access to water information than women?
305	As I've said, our traditional practice is that the women go for the water. So their attention to keep the water sources clean, to use the water effectively on health grounds. Yes. I mean because they are more close to using water their attention is there as to water managment and what have you.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So, we're now coming to talk about water use, management and disagreements that results from the use of the water resources here.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So what do you normally use water for?
305	Yeah, we use water basically for drinking, cooking, washing of other things, either clothes or utensils, Or even animals When it becomes necessary. Our sheep we wash them. If you have a horse, you wash it, and what do you call it .... Rural enterprise projects, like soap making, we use water. So basically these are the areas we use water.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And where do you get the water from? Which are the sources?
305	Our sources ... The key source now is borehole. We have dams, then we have ponds or streams. But the key source of late is the boreholes. The streams and the dams, they are now fading out.
Shani Haruna:	Do you use the water for farming activities?
305	Yeah, the dam is where we use it for farming activities. We use for irrigation. The borehole water too we use it for our nurseries. Yes.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So in your use of the water for the activities that you have mentioned, what has allowed you to plan your use of the water better?
305	The plan for the use of the water better ... Yeah the management education we get and the climate change and the rains ... You have to get this information and plan. When are you doing your nursery if you want to use the borehole water or if you are going to do the nursery at the pond, when is there water at the pond? The dictate of our planning is from the climate information ... What do you call it .... The rain fall information.
Shani Haruna:	So how do you use the rainfall information in planning for your stage of the water?
305	It tells ... The forecast tells you when you might have rain and if there is rain at a certain period you expect there may be water in the pond or enough in the dam. That tells you when to do what crop or what activity. Yes.
Shani Haruna:	Okay sir.
Shani Haruna:	So, how has the brave project helped you to manage water better?
305	Yeah. The brave project give us that sort of training direct on the ... Like the radio information, the agric office information, the research center information. The brave projecs has sat with us and it looks like it has reviewed all these things direct. So I think that it have made our adoption to these new methods far, far better.
Shani Haruna:	What did you learn under water management under the brave project?
305	Water management .... Keeping your water source clean, and from the source to the home .. How you should also keep water in the home clean. Yeah. The forecast will also tell you when you will have ... Definitely the focus will also tell you when you should plan and sow because you might be expecting rain, and it also tells us the crop that is necessary for you to sow to match with the raining period. So I think we have learned all of these things.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. the water sources that you mentioned, the boreholes, the wells and then the dams. Do you have people that are responsible for managing those water sources?
305	Yes. You have the immediate community and you have a key person who's the leader of managing that ... What we will call it .... Who precides over let us clean, let us do this or who oversees the day to day cleanness of the source. We have some body.
Shani Haruna:	And is that person part of a group or it's just that person alone?
305	That person is part of the immediate community. So it's a group and that person too can also belong to some of these recent formation of groups. Yes, where we also pass information from brave, from agric to them.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So do you have a committee in charge of managing the boreholes and then the wells and even the dam?
305	We have committees. It's the ponds that do not have committee as such. But the boreholes and the dam ... We have the dam committee. Each borehole has a committee, a management committee.
Shani Haruna:	And how many people are in the committee?
305	Some are up to seven. Some like the dam ... It is even divided into many groups. So you have five ... And all of them taking that stretch of the dam irrigable area. The membership of the committee can be many and be up to 23, 25. But the borehole they are between five and seven.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	And what are the roles of the members? The committee members, what are their positions and what are their roles?
305	Yeah, you have the chairman, you have the secretary, you have the treasurer, you have the organizing secretary or the chief whip. They have it all like that. And some of them have opened accounts. Yes.
Shani Haruna:	So what are the roles of the chairman, the secretary, the organizer, and then the chief whip that you mentioned?
305	The secretary keeps the records, he has the book of registered members who use that source of water daily. Then the treasurer also keeps the book of the accounts. When they make repairs or when they pay the put into the bank. The chairman is the presiding member of the committee. The chairman is one of the two ... One of three who are signarities to the bank account if they have an account at all. But then some of them have bank accounts.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So then how are they selected?
305	They are selected in a community meeting. The district assembly and the community. And they select the management team. Yes.
Shani Haruna:	And what do you consider before selecting the members?
305	Well they consider those who will actively lead the community. And then they select them ... Who they think are patient, have the time. There are some when you give them that position they have no time. They will be ... Maybe always ... Some of them are petty traders .... Always on the road traveling. So they'll consider those who are usually available and will be selfless.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So we're now coming to talk about disagreements on water use. Do you think the water usage results in disagreements? Maybethe use of the boreholes or the Wells and then the dams, does it result in disagreements?
305	Yeah, you have disagreements. There are some who will not want to pay the levies. So they will always have to confront them. But I think usually they are able to settle it. At the dam site,tThey'll open the valves and water will go to some section and will not reach some section. So you hear those groups affected also grumbling and shouting and well usually they are able to resolve them.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So those disagreements, how are they .... How are they normally resolved?
305	They confront the management committees. They confront the management committees. It might be the fact that they have not cleared their gutter or something like that. So the managment committee will be on their feet to organize to rectify whatever be the challenge. Yes.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	How about the disagreements relating to the boreholes? How are they resolved?
305	When they have something like that ... The peak of it, they have to go to the elder. Every community has got an old man or an elder. So when they disagree, they ... Atmos, if they fail to resolve within they will go to the most elderly person in that immediate community using that borehole. And usually, they will have to come to an agreement.
Shani Haruna:	So that elderly person that you mentioned, is it always a man or it can be an elderly woman?
305	Always always a man. He's the landord. Hardly do we have landlords who are landladies here. He's always a man.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. then still on the water management, would you like to involve the local district assembly to help with water management?
305	Yeah, the water management is actually the work of the district assembly. Soall the boreholes, all the dams it is ...., the authority comes from the district assembly. So it is the district assembly who precides in even the formation of these committees through their wings like the environmental site, or they call it what... They have the water outfit in the district assembly.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Thenback to the disagreements. How has the brave helped in improving these disagreements?
305	I think brave hasn't gone direct to these disagreement, but from this skills we have taken into effect, well, it tells us that we should also initiate something ... Yes, to manage our disagreement.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So how are you using the skills that you have acquired in the project to help resolve the disagreements?
305	The skills there is the management attitude. This is attitude really. It's not practical skills. The management attitude, how brave manages these training sessions. And so if you are also in the committee or are even outside the committee and you need to school them to be able to understand one another so they will move forward to face the world challenges.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. thenin terms of water access, what do you think needs to happen so that you can have more access to water?
305	I think thatlike maintenance of these boreholes or even maintenance of the dams, we do not have enough skills. Maybe the district assemblies need to try to continuously give skills to the community members so that .... Like if a boreholeiss broken, we just have to run to the district assembly for an artisan to come and make repairs. And even the spare parts, we don't know where they are. The district assembly buys the spare parts from somewhere. I think there is the need for this improvement and maybe the district assemblies probably need .... Or whichever body that can help is welcome.
Shani Haruna:	So apart from the skills, what other thing do you think should happen so that you can have more access to water?
305	Availability to ... Availability to materials. If like even this community is enjoying the mechanized borehole using the sun power, what do you term it ... Solar power ... The community members do you not have the least skill in this thing. The equipment involved like the tubes or joints, we don't even know where ... If it is spoilt we don't know which market you can go and get it. So I think that or availability of some of these materials should also be, within our markets.
Shani Haruna:	Then how has the brave helped you to increase your income?
305	Yeah, the caution on the climate change and the appropriate crops or activities to our farming practices. Yeah. It has helped a lot and those of us who have adopted this information it has helped us to increase our yields.
Shani Haruna:	Sowhat would you say about your yields if you compare now and then in the past, what is the difference?
305	The difference .... The difference, we cannot dimension it in terms of figures, but different years we used to have we called lean season and many families would have consumed all the yield they had. But now for the past years, we don't talk of lean season again. It looks like almost every family can feed all round the year.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So, is there any other experience or knowledge that you want to share with us apart from the things that we have discussed this morning?
305	Yes. sustenance of our improve yields. We still lack storage .... Skills in storage and facilities of storage. We still lack them. If some of these things can be done. We cannot keep our grains over one year. Supposing we have storage that can keep the grain more than a year. I don't talk of the perishable goods. We can't can our meat. If you kill your fowl and you don't eat it that day and the following day and then it will go bad. So we still need skills on some of these things for sustenance that can be a long period.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Sir, we'll like to say a very big thank you to you for your time and then the knowledge and experiences that you have shared with us. We are very much happy and grateful to you for your time.
305	Oh, thank you. It's appreciated. Thank you very much.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.

 
 
 
Shani Haruna:	This interview is with 306, annon number 007
Translator:	To do the translation on behalf of 306 is I Atirago Kate Atipoka
Shani Haruna:	Sothe first thing we will like to know is her full name and date of Birth and whether she's male or female.
Translator:	My name is 306. I'm 35 years of age and I'm a female.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And does she hold any position here?
Translator:	No, I don't hold any position.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So we would like to know what her understanding of the brave project is.
Translator:	What I know about brave project is that it tells us how to do farming and how to live in our households.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. What did they tell them about water under the project?
Translator:	What I learned from this project or what the projects have taught me is, anytime I'm to fetch water, I make sure that my containers are neatly washed and after fetching water into them, I'll make sure it will be well covered.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And what did she hear about the groundwater?
Translator:	I've learned that anytime they want to give us water, maybe dig a borehole or a well, they will test that place, if it is a soil or the water to know if it doesn't have any problems that will affect them when they are to drink. So when they detect this thing they will know whether the place that they want to dig will be advisable to them and they will go ahead.
Shani Haruna:	Okay, that's okay. So we're now coming to talk about access to weather information and then how they use the weather information. So how did she find out information about the weather last season?
Translator:	What I heard about the weather information during last season was that we were told that there will be rains for very long time and when it is threatening to rain and we are in the farms we should make sure we'll leave whatever we are doing and rush home because it will come with wind.
Shani Haruna:	Where did that information come from? Where did she get that information?
Translator:	This information was heard from this brief project.
Shani Haruna:	By what means? From which source?
Translator:	They came with a Gmet expert who told or educated us on how the rains pattern would be.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So apart from the project, which other source did she get weather information from?
Translator:	I have also heard the information or I used to hear from radio stations whereby agric extension officers do discuss it on radios and be telling us the kind of varieties to be using.
Shani Haruna:	Which radio station did she listen to it?
Translator:	Quality FM in Garu district.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Then apart from the radio stations, are there other associations or groups where she is a member and is able to access information about the weather.
Translator:	No. Apart from this two, which is the radio station and through the brave project, I've never heard any informing about the weather anywhere.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. The radio that she mentioned that she listens to.... The radio set, who owns that radio that? Is it herself or her husband?
Translator:	The radio set is owned by my husband.
Shani Haruna:	Andwho uses it most?
Translator:	It was my husband who uses it most.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So now the next thing we will like to find out is, how did she find out information about the weather this season?
Translator:	We were told that this year or just the last season, there will be enough rains so we should try and do bonding so that whenever it's raining heavily it will not wash away our crops.
Shani Haruna:	And where did she hear that information from?
Translator:	The information is always heard from this brave project and the radio station who normally play what has been discussed here.
Shani Haruna:	Apart from the brave project and then the radio stations does she get information from government institutions or agencies or agric officers about the weather?
Translator:	No, it's just from these two places that I heard the weather information from.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. She mentioned she has had information about the weather. What changes did she make in her farming activities because she got that information?
Translator:	Due to the information I had I adopted the new varieties that they were educating us to be planting so that even if the rain rains small my crops will not spoil or if it rains less it will not affect my crops.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Can she give us examples of the crops that she sowed as a result of getting the weather information?
Translator:	I planted maize, millet and soybeans.
Shani Haruna:	What did she intend to sow before she heard the weather information and then decided to sow the maize, soybeans and the millet?
Translator:	It's the same crops, which is millet, maize and soybeans that I had wanted to plant.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And did you make any changes in terms of when you sowed the crops that you mentioned?
Translator:	The changes I have made is, when I heard the information the quantity that I planted was more than the previous years. Besides that I used new varieties, those that they were educating us to buy.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. The new varieties that she's talking about, what did they say about it that made her to buy it?
Translator:	What I was told was that some of the varieties don't take long time before it matures. Besides that we were taught how to plant them so that it will yield well for us.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Then, she mentioned she got weather information. Now, in the future what would be the best way for her to receive information about the weather?
Translator:	I pray I will be having radio set all the times so that I'll always tune to radio stations to be monitoring. Definitely I will be hearing something on the weather which will help me. So this is the medium I want to use in future to be listening to the weather information.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. In your opinion... In her opinion, does she think that men listen to radio more than women?
Translator:	I think men listen to radio more than women in a sense that when it is in the evening most men don't have much to do. They're always by their radio set listening to what is happening. But for women, you have to do household chores by fetching water, cooking and doing a lot of things. So by the time you finish all these things, the man have already listened a lot and maybe acquire some information that you have not gotten the opportunity to.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And is there a better way that she thinks that she can get more information apart from the radio?
Translator:	For her opinion, she thinks these projects should always be there so that she will be getting opportunity from this brave project to be hearing about the weather.
Shani Haruna:	Assuming in the absence of that project, what would be the best way for her to get access to weather information?
Translator:	My opinion is just on this project. I wish this one would just be there all the time for me to be getting the weather information.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. That's fine. So in her opinion again, does she think that men have more phones than women?
Translator:	I think men have phones more than ladies or woman in a sense that we women have a lot of responsibilities. For example, we buy ingredients, we buy soap, we buy a lot of things for the house. So I wouldn't agree to use my money and go and buy phone whereby my child may not have a dress to wear or there may not be soap for me to wash children clothing.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So don't the men also help with those items that she mentioned?
Translator:	They help though, but it's just a little, it's not enough.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. then how often does she get access to agric extension officer?
Translator:	I've never seen an agric officer visiting me to check my livestock or my crops.
Shani Haruna:	But has she ever been in a group meeting where the agric extension officer gives them information?
Translator:	I think it's just this brave project that I've been hearing such an information from the agric extension officers.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So when the agric extension officer visits does he or she give them information about water management?
Translator:	I've been taught that like any time it rains I shouldn't just let the water go waste, I should try to collect, even if it is rain water on the ground I should try to collect the water and make good use of such a water.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And would she like to get information from agric extension officers?
Translator:	Yes, I will like to be getting information from them. For instance, they're those who always teach us to manage our farm produce well and they will also teach us how to take care of our grains or look at it well, whereby it will be quality for us and anytime we are going to use, it wouldn't have bad effects on us. We should make sure there will not be...., It will not be contaminated in terms of chemicals or weevils that may harm us.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So, we're now coming to discuss access to crops information and then use. She mentioned she farms maize, soybeans and millet. So how did she find out information about the crops that she grows last season?
Translator:	Okay. I think it was just about the varieties that they introduced. We were told that those varieties are very good compared to those days when we were not getting those varieties. If I should say those days they used to be famine or hunger, but due to the varieties that they introduced it have reduce those hunger on previous years.
Shani Haruna:	Nowwhere did she get that information?
Translator:	I heard the information from MoFA official who spoke about it on air or radio station.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Then, how did she find out information about the crops that she grows this season?
Translator:	I heard the information from GBC URA radio Bolgatanga.
Shani Haruna:	What did you hear about crops?
Translator:	I heard that those varieties mature earlier. Besides that, it also do well.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And in the future, what would be the best way for her to receive such information?
Translator:	I wish the coming years this project will still be there whereby we'll be doing group discussion, radio discussions, and I'll be getting the information from there.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So how about..... Assuming the project is no more there what would be the other best way for her to get the information?
Translator:	Even if this project will not be there coming years, I wish the leaders of this project would try when it is time for planting or if it is raining season, they will get time to come and meet us maybe for some time and still educate us on our farming practices.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Then, from all the information that she heard, what changes did she make to her farming activities?
Translator:	Those days when I was not getting the information anytime I farm I don't always have good yields.
Shani Haruna:	And now that you have the informationwhat do you do differently that is making you to get more yields?
Translator:	I was thought the number of seeds or grains to be put in a hole and I was also applying organic fertilizer and how I was also applying it was very good because that was how I was taught. So these things led to my good yield.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. What about your livestock? Did you make any changes in your livestock activities?
Translator:	I rear fowls and the changes I have made is that this time I have a cage that I put them inside and make sure their food, their water is inside. I also make sure the place is neat. Unlike those days, I wasn't having time. Sometime they would die or some will even get lost that I cannot find them.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	How did she find the well monitoring training that she received? Did she receive a training on well monitoring?
Translator:	I didn't receive any information on well training. Well training.
Shani Haruna:	So we are now coming to talk about gender and access to general information. Does she think that men and women have access to different information?
Translator:	Yes. I think men or women have get different information.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So what kind of information do women get, and what kind of information do men get differently?
Translator:	For the men the information they will hear and hide from women sometime is that, when your relative is dead, and they receive the information, sometimes they will hide from you for some time. They wouldn't just tell you instant. If it is also about development and they receive any information at all, they will like to sit together to decide on whatever they are planning to do before maybe they may open up.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So do you think men get more information about the water than women?
Translator:	I think men have access to water information than women.
Shani Haruna:	Why is that so?
Translator:	Men are always the breadwinners of the family. So whatever comes, they are those who always receive the information first.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And does that affect the relationship between men and women?
Translator:	It doesn't spoil or affect any relationship between them.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. both men and women are okay with the way it is, with men getting the information first before the women?
Translator:	I think all of us are not having any problem with men receiving or having access to information first.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Then we're now coming to talk about water usage, management and disagreements. So the first thing we would like to discuss under that is, what has allowed her to plan her water use better?
Translator:	It's through this brave project that I've gotten these new knowledge on how to manage my water. So for now, how I wash, how I cook, however I do my domestic work, I know how to manage well, and it is through this project that I've learned from.
Shani Haruna:	So what did you learn about water management in the project?
Translator:	I was taught the importance of water usage and how to manage, so I know the essence of water usage so that's why I've adapted these changes.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	So would she say that water usage results in disagreements? The use of the boreholes and then the dams do disagreements often result as a result of them using the boreholes or the dams?
Translator:	It doesn't bring any disagreement between people.
Shani Haruna:	Why is that so?
Translator:	It doesn't bring disagreement in the sense that for the dams, for instance, we have dug-outs in our gardens and whenever they opened the dams, everybody's dug-out always get full with water and the person will be using it there to water his or her vegetables or crops. So, because the water is always there for everyone we don't have any disagreements.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	How about the use of have the boreholes? Do they result in any disagreement?
Translator:	For now we don't have any disagreements at our boreholes anytime we are to fetch water. Because unlike the previous years, when we were not having enough, that always lead to disagreement for who is to fetch first, but for now World Vision for instance, have helped out with number of boreholes. So there is no always queue anytime we're going to fetch. So it doesn't bring disagreements.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Then how has the brave project helped her to improve or increase her income?
Translator:	Through the program I always harvest more and that case anytime I want to sell or if there's good market and I want to sell, I can always sell some to get money for myself.
Speaker 3:	Okay. How many bags has she been able to harvest as compared to the other years when the brave project was not there?
Translator:	The changes is that before this project I wasn't harvesting up to a bag, but through this project for now, maize for instance, I can get like eight to nine bags.
Shani Haruna:	Okay, that's nice. And then I think we're almost at the end of our discussion. So the last question is what needs to happen to improve what that access, in her opinion?
Translator:	In my opinion, I think if opinion leaders or maybe the leaders of these projects can get us more boreholes and rehabilitate our dam and also get us additional dug-outs, it would've help me.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So we'll like to say a very big thank you for your time and then for you sharing your experiences with us.
Translator:	She also appreciate. She tanks you for making her to voice out the knowledge that she has acquired through this project.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.

 
 
 
Shani Haruna:	This interview with 307, annon number 001. So sir, we'd like you to state your full name, your date of birth, and whether you are male or female.
307...:	Okay. My name is 307. I was born in 10th May, 1986 and I am a male.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And do you, hold any community position?
307...:	Yeah. I'm one of the executive of ...., I hold church position, but that one is just a district one. I'm a district men rep of Assemblies of God church. Okay.
Shani Haruna:	Are there other positions that you hold apart from the church position?
307...:	Only that I'm executive of ... We call it daka daka or groups, the susu groups I'm one of the executives, secretary.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So the other thing we would like to know is, we would like you to explain what your understanding of the brave project is. What do you know about the brave project?
307...:	Okay. My understanding towards the brave project is to help us to maybe come out from the poverty increase we are finding ourselves like climate change which we are facing during the previous years, which made us to maybe loose a lot of harvest and that one lead us to poverty level. So I've seen that the brave program have come to educate us how to ... That is how to maybe plant our maize or the time we suppose to plant our crops and how to go about it so that we will have a lot of harvests and will have a lot of harvests during the year. So that's what I have understood about the program brave.
Shani Haruna:	What other things did you learn about apart from the planting of the crops?
307...:	Yeah, I've learned that we should reserve water. Water reservation. And also they have taught us to maybe use nim trees and nuts to prepare insecticides which we can use to control some insects in our crops. Yeah, that's what I've learned.
Shani Haruna:	You mentioned you also learned something about water. What is it that you learned about the water?
307...:	Yeah, I say water because that we should reserve watering during the rain season so that when it is dry season, we can use that water maybe to wash our clothings, We can also use that water for our animals. And we can also use that water Maybe in case we want to maybe water some of the plants around our houses, we can use that water to water them.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. what did you also learn about groundwater?
307...:	Groundwater, that one is ... What I learned about groundwater is the water that we get it through down from the ground and that one is borehole water. And that's what I have learned about it.
Shani Haruna:	So we're now coming to talk about access to weather information and how you use the weather information. So we would like to know, how did you find out information about the weather last season?
307...:	Yeah, I had the information about the weather last season through brave program. So, they brought .... They came along with one of the weather forecasters man, and he trained us how we are going to go about the weather during the season. So sometimes too, we also hear it ... Also had information through radio programs like radio programs.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. which radio program did you get the information from?
307...:	That's ura radio from Bolga. We also get the radio program ... The information through that radio program.
Shani Haruna:	And apart from the radio program and then the brave project, which other sources did you get weather information from?
307...:	Sometimes you also get weather information from Garu Presby Agric Station and also MoFA from Garu.
Shani Haruna:	And how do they get the information to you? By what means do they use to get the information to you?
307...:	Yeah. Sometimes they ... Sometimes we get the information through them from radio media, that's on air, like Quality FM and the rest. They always go there and educate us how the season is going to be.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Then you mentioned you sometimes you get the information from the radio who normally uses the radio set that you listen to? Who normally owns it?
307...:	The owner of the radio pro.... The radio is .... We call him doctor Asana. He's a doctor living at Garu.
Shani Haruna:	Actually I'm referring to the wireless set and not the radio station. Yeah. who normally owns that wireless set in your household? And then who also uses it most? Is it men or women?
307...:	Okay. That one .... It's being owned by me and to me I would say I normally use it more than my wife or the ladies. We, the men normally use it more than the ladies because in the evening time you see the ladies, they will be there preparing food, but we will have chance to listen to the radio.
Shani Haruna:	So you also mentioned that you sometimes get weather information from the agric officers or mofa. How do you normally get access to the agric officers or MoFA?
307...:	Through radio program and sometimes too they sometimes organize a community maybe meetings or gathering and when we gather .... When we come together, they always come there and maybe educate us.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	Then apart from the sources that you have mentioned, the radio or the extension officers are there other sources where you get weather information from?
307...:	Sometimes I do get weather information from my colleagues in churches and in market squares.
Shani Haruna:	And what kind of weather information do you normally get from those people?
307...:	Yeah. That one is ... When it is ... Sometime when it is always getting to maybe raining season time, you see that they will make sure that the agric extension agents they will make sure that they broadcast it on air so that everybody will know when we supposed to start sowing our crops. And when we are expected of rain. Yeah. So through that one, maybe if I didn't have maybe a radio set to listen, sometimes my colleagues normally hear it and maybe also pass it to me.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So what we have been talking about is how you get access ... How you got access to information last season. So we're now coming to this season. How did you find out information about the weather this season? When I say this season ... The one that just ended. How did you get information about the weather?
307...:	I also get info .... This season I also get the information through brave program and also through agric station agents of ....Or agric station. It is through these areas that I normally got the weather program or yeah the weather program.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And what information did you hear? What did they say about the weather?
307...:	Yeah, this year what I heard about the weather during the beginning of the year, they said that this year there'll be rain ... There will be rain but the rain would not be ... It will be normal. It will not be too much and the gaps between the raining will always not be more than three or will not be more than three or four days intervals. So during the season we had this information, through brave program, and they told us that that is how the year is going to be.
Shani Haruna:	And did it much with what happened or how the rains went?
307...:	Yeah, actually, it really matched with what they have taught us.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So we're now coming to talk about the changes that you made in your farming activities as a result of you accessing the information. So what changes did you make in your farming activities because you accessed the weather information?
307...:	Yeah, through the weather information which I got, it really helped me during the season. Because when I had to the information I know that maybe probably I'm supposed to maybe sow my maize on this day. And actually ... I supposed to know that because there will be rain and the types of crops that I'm supposed to sow during the season and when I sowed those crops, really the crops really yield and I have a lot of harvests. So through ... Because it is through the weather program, either than that during the previous years when I didn't maybe have some like that anytime I want to maybe plant my crops or anything at all, I'll always plant it any how, because sometimes I can plant it and they'll be drought. Sometimes I can also plant it, maybe or like I can plant and there'll be no rain. That's why I said drought and there'll be no rain and those seeds that I used to plant can go on loss. So, but this season when we had the weather information, it help us to know when we suppose or the time we supposed to sow it and the type of crops we should use so that it can help us.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	So usually what time of the year do you start sowing your crops?
307...:	Yeah, this year we start sowing the crops during June. During June. That's June. If you want to plant something like maize they asked us to plant it during June 15th or yeah 15th going or 10th June going, yeah. If we plant during this time, those time between 15th June, that we will have a lot of harvest. So I plant my maize during June.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. so in the past, what time did you normally sow your crops?
307...:	Yeah. In the past because ... In the past when we just see that there is rain whether it is May or maybe April, sometimes we do sow. And because it is not time, you see the drought will come and all the plants or the crops will die. Yeah. Maybe because now we have the weather forecast information which they have been informing us we know the time we supposed to sow it and normally they say normally June is the time that we supposed to sow if we want to plant maize.
Shani Haruna:	So what other changes did you do apart from the sowing time?
307...:	Yeah. And through the information ... Yeah. They have educate us to maybe sow crops ... That's early crops that maybe we can harvest it in time so that when it is maybe when it is getting to October going, by that time and we have already harvest it which we may not face ... Maybe if there is no rain, we may not run into loss of it. So they educate us to sow a new variety of crops. Example of some of the new variety is one called sanza sima. Yeah, that one and some other .... And also they have educate us to sow ... We call it ... That's white millet. It's a millet but in our local dialect we call it naga white. But it is a white millet which we can harvest it maybe within three months.
Shani Haruna:	So the sanza sima what is that? What crop is it?
307...:	It's a maize crop. Because with that one it can withstand drought too and also mature in time. You can harvest it in time.
Shani Haruna:	How long does it .... How long does it take before it matures?
307...:	Maybe two and a half months. Getting to three months and it is ready for harvesting.
Shani Haruna:	So did you make changes to your animal rearing? Livestock farming.
307...:	Yeah. Really, I've made a changes to my animals rearing because when this program came they taught us how to maybe preserve some stalks so that during the dry season we can use those stalks to feed our animals. They also taught us how to keep them clean and that one they said we should keep their ... Where ... Their surroundings, where the houses of the animals like goat and sheep. That was always sweep those places, make those places clean so that that one will make them healthy and it'll also help them from maybe getting some infection. So really it has helped us a lot.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So the weather information that you received, in the future, what would be the best way for you to receive it? The weather information.
307...:	To me. Okay. I would like to say in the future ... I would like to say if they can maybe broadcast it through the international broadcasting radios rather than the FM stations. Because the FM station, sometimes the channels didn't reach some areas. So but if it is international one I know everybody will be able to have the information and it will help everybody and not only me alone.
Shani Haruna:	Apart from those too which other ways or means do you think will work best for you and the people here?
307...:	Okay. One way of maybe spreading the information I would say if they get some agents that will be going from community to community, maybe and educating or giving the information. Sometimes some people may not have time to listen to the radios. So but if maybe we have some agents moving to the communities, educating us, maybe it will help us a lot to have the information.
Shani Haruna:	Then you mentioned international stations, like ... Can you explain more about the the international stations and that you mentioned?
307...:	That one, I mean, if they can maybe like GBC or TV3 sometimes too, and that one, many people have access to or many people have access to it. So if they can also have their program through these areas.
Shani Haruna:	So you mean that national stations?
307...:	Yeah, the national stations.
Shani Haruna:	Sodo you think men listen to radio more than a women here in your community?
307...:	Yeah, actually to me, I would say most ... The men do listen to the radio more than the ladies. Because always if you see the ladies always, the ladies are always engaged in some activities. But the men, sometimes have some chances to listen to the radio more than the ladies, especially maybe if it is in the evening time you see that the lady will be there, she will be there preparing the food or after the food she will try to maybe see how best she can do and maybe bath her children. After bathing the children, you see that she will be tired and will not have time to maybe listen to the radio again. But we the men maybe after work when we came home, we have no any other things disturbing us a lot. So most men do listen to the radio more than ladies.
Shani Haruna:	And do you also think that .... Or let me say men and women, who do you think have more radio sets than the other?
307...:	To me, I would say the men, have radio sets than the ladies because the ladies since they have no time to listen with that one they don't have interest of maybe forcing themselves to get the radio set. But because the men have time to listen to the radio most men are always trying how best they can do maybe to get the radio sets. So with that one the men have radio sets more than the ladies.
Shani Haruna:	And do men have more phones than women here?
307...:	Yeah. Okay. In this community, what I observe ... Yeah it's actually true that the men have more phones than the the ladies because comparing the financial side here most men are able to maybe have so many activities doing, but the ladies, no. So because of that ... So because of that, most men have phones more than the ladies.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Then how often do agric extension officers visit to give you information about your farming activities?
307...:	Agric informations, Yeah, they normally give us the information right from the beginning of the rain season. Like maybe if it is March they will create awareness of us that we are getting to season, we should prepare towards it. They will ask us maybe to like gathering of rubbish, spreading of compost and preparing towards it. So when it is always May time, you see that they will also start giving us the information that it is time. So most farmers should be ready and maybe by June when we... Maybe by June 15th or 14th when we get rain that we should start sowing. We shouldn't wait. And after that, maybe July or August ... July and sometimes they always go round and maybe educate us how to apply the fertilizer. They normally say that when applying the fertilizer, when the weather is wet, we shouldn't apply fertilizer, We should wait so that the dew or moist can maybe evaporate small before we can apply the fertilizer. And sometimes too they also go round educating us how to use the weedicide normally called condemn, normally educate us how to use it so that maybe it may not harm us. And even not only us maybe if we didn't know how to use it sometimes it can also harm us. It can also kill our animals. It can also even killed the crops in which We are ready to maybe .... We have sowed it.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So do they normally visit you at the farm or they organize a meeting and give out the information? Or how do they normally give out the information? By what means do they give out the information?
307...:	Yeah. Sometimes they always organize a meeting. Normally that's what they've been doing. They always organize a meeting or give us the information that maybe by this day they will have meeting and the venue will be here and they are expecting most farmers to be there. So when we come together, they'll give us the information. And also they normally ask us maybe if any farmer has any problem with his maybe farming activities, that farmer can draw them attention. With that one, they can come maybe to that person individually and attend the problem that he is facing. So sometimes too, they always ... They normally come to our maybe farm site and see. Like this year and last year there are some insects, they'll call it .... Some insects came and they were chopping mostly the maize, so most of the agric extension officers ... They normally go around and are inspecting. If they come to your farm and see that the insects are there, then they'll ask you to provide maybe your ID card, your name, yeah, your ID card number, your name. If you are able to provide that one, they'll give you some insecticides so that you can use to spray the farm.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. then what information do the agric extension officers normally give you about water management and the weather?
307...:	Yeah, really the normally say water is life and for that matter we should know how to maybe use the water that we are getting like in our boreholes or maybe there is some dig-out, we should know how to manage with it so that we can use it usefully for a purpose and not just to waste it any how. And the weather too, yeah, they normally ... Maybe sometimes too they normally give us the information about the weather like maybe, back at here especially at this our Kusaagu traditional area ... I don't know whether it's throughout the nation or it is only just this area, when it is normally getting to rain season sometimes we normally experience a lot of heavy rainstorm which normally blow our houses away. So when it is always getting to seasons time they normally create awareness of us to prepare our houses very well. Sometimes they will let us use some ... Like the grass houses ... We should use some ropes to maybe tie them. And even maybe the zinc or the iron sheet houses, sometimes they will ask us to maybe lay it very well. So that, and they also draw our attention that maybe by this time we will experience a heavy storm and for that matter they expect that when it is that time, we shouldn't be away from farm or we shouldn't be away. Or when we see that maybe the rain is maybe threatening, we should always run to maybe our houses rather than maybe being in the farm or go and hiding maybe under trees which can cause maybe harm to us.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Then what crops do you farm?
307...:	For the crop side I farm so many types of crops. When it is raining season I farm millet maize, soybeans, groundnuts, rice, and some other crops. Sometimes vegetable crops too. I used to maybe plant those ones.
Shani Haruna:	So the crops that you mentioned how did you find out information about them last season?
307...:	Yeah. Information about them ... Yeah, I had the information through brave and agric station about them.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And what kind of information did you find about your crops?
307...:	Yeah. the information I found about my crops is, something like soybeans, yeah, they informed us that when we sow maize, maybe after one week going, we should sow maize on it. Like we should sow maize to make it as a mixed cropping. That the soybeans, there are some nutrients in it. So when we sow it, it helped the ... After harvesting, the next year, it helped the maybe the ground to retain its fertility so that when we sow any thing at all, we see that we will have a lot of harvest in it. And sometimes too, when we sow something like maize, you see that the leaves of it will cover the ground making the ground not to dry in time.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So the season that just ended, how did you find out information about the crops?
307...:	Yeah. The same brave and agric station and MoFA.
Shani Haruna:	And what kind of information did you find out?
307...:	Yeah, this year through brave program. They educate us when we are sowing maybe something like maize or any crop that tall that we should space them. We should space it which will help the crop to be able to maybe grow very well. If we didn't space it, there will be no air blowing through them. So yeah, educate us to maybe space our crops, when sowing.
Shani Haruna:	Then in the future, what would be the best way for you to receive such information?
307...:	Okay. In the future. Okay. The best way to receive those information, I would like it to be on air so that most of the farmers will be able to have access for the information. But if they can also have maybe agents, yeah ... Community agents that can be also going round like the way they are doing too, it is good. But I prefer being it on air or having it broadcast through radios. Yeah. I believe that one will maybe help us or will help many people to have access about the information.
Shani Haruna:	How did you find the well monitoring training that you received? Well monitoring.
307...:	Okay. With that one I don't know much about that because I didn't receive any training maybe concerning that one.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	So we're now coming to talk about gender and then access to information. In your opinion do you think men and women have access to different information?
307...:	Information ... Yeah to me ... Yeah. I would say men and women, Yeah, they have access to maybe different informations really.
Shani Haruna:	So what kind of information do men get and what kind of information do a women get?
307...:	Yeah, most men get some information through their colleagues, like how to maybe be with their wives or how to handle their family affairs and so forth and most ladies too have information through their maybe colleague ladies on how to maybe handle or how to be with their husbands, how to cater for the children and how to manage in the house activities and so forth. So these are the information that I believe Men had women also had.
Shani Haruna:	So assuming somebody ... Like a new information is coming into your community, who do you think will get it first? Men or women?
307...:	Yeah, mostly most of the information when any information is just about to spread in my community, I would say most of the ladies have the information first rather than the men. So the ladies had the information first.
Shani Haruna:	Why is that the case?
307...:	Yeah, the case is just because most men don't like talking. So but ladies anywhere they have come together you see that they'll be giving more information ... They like talking. So, and because of that they normally get the information but most men don't like talking. And most men too when maybe he had the information, he always keep it by himself. But when a lady hear may be any information at all, oh within some minutes will be trying how best she can do so that she can also pass the information to maybe a colleague person. That's how most ladies used to have the information first than the men.
Shani Haruna:	Among the men and women here, who do you think gets more information about water?
307...:	To me in this community, about water I would say most ladies do get the information than men.
Shani Haruna:	Why do most women get more information about water than men?
307...:	Because they say water is life, and maybe if a household is .... You know, it's the duty of the ladies to see how best they can do so that they will get water into the house so that they can use for preparing of meals. They can use it for bathing, they can use it for washing their clothes and they can also use it to give it to their husbands to maybe do some other things like bathing or giving it to maybe some animals. Because, most of the time it is the duty of the ladies to do that. That's how most ladies have the information of water than the men.
Shani Haruna:	And the fact that women have more information about water than men, does that affect the relationship between men and women?
307...:	Okay. With that one sometimes ..... I would say sometimes it affects the ladies because men .... Because it is the duty of the lady maybe to struggle how best she can do it to get the water, most men don't care whether there is water or not. Most men, they don't care maybe to help the lady and maybe see how they can do to get water or maybe dig out or maybe find out where they can get water. So because of that it always affects the ladies a lot because if there are no maybe ...if there are shortage of water it is the lady who is going to maybe suffer a lot and get water for the family.
Shani Haruna:	Okay, we're now coming to talk about water usage, management and disagreements.
Shani Haruna:	So the first thing we will like to discuss is how do you plan your water usage?
307...:	Yeah, my water usage, the way I plan it is, maybe like if they go to the borehole and maybe brings water in to the household, I always ask them not to be pouring it away anyhow, but they should use it ... Maybe if they want to prepare food, they should know how to use it or if they want to wash their clothings there's they should know how to use the water or if maybe in case we have, we have planted some maybe flowering or any plants around the household, I always ask maybe my wife and the children to always maybe take the water that would be okay for one plant and not that they should just maybe fetch the water anyhow which can maybe if they go to water the plant part of it will just maybe run away going waste. So that's how I plan with my maybe water usage.
Shani Haruna:	And how has the brave project helped you to manage water better?
307...:	Yeah. The brave program has helped us to manage water better. Yeah. But asking us maybe if we can afford something like polytanks or if we can use something like cement and built something like a tank or we call it a reservoir, if we can use cement and do that one, so that during the rain season, when it is raining, we can make a source in to the Polytank or the reservoir, so that the water can be passing through it. And when it is dry season, then we can then be using that water maybe for watering the plants around us, giving it to animals, maybe washing of clothes so that when the ladies go for the borehole water we can use that one for preparation of food and drinking. That's how maybe I have plan with my water usage.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And the water sources that you mentioned the boreholes and then the wells do you have committees in charge of managing those water sources?
307...:	Yeah, in our community here whether it is a borehole or a well, even if it is even a dam, we have committees or executives guiding it. Yeah. Other than that, if we don't have maybe executive or some people taking care of or guiding it, maybe you see that sometimes, if like a borehole, maybe in case it spoil, it is the duty of the executives that they will ask the community members to come together, maybe and see how best they can be able to maintain it. If they cannot maintain it by themselves, then they will contribute money so that they can get somebody who, who can maybe repair it for them. So either it is a well or a borehole or even a dam ... We have a dam here. We have executive who are taking care of it, seeing how best they can manage with it or manage with the water so that we can use it for watering our onions and the rest.
Shani Haruna:	And how many people in the committee?
307...:	Normally in the committee we normally have the chairperson and sometimes the vice, the secretary and the treasurer the organizer. And even in the .... Maybe when it is a borehole ... We have one borehole in our community. We have some people, we have chosen some executives. Those executives will be responsible for maybe sweeping around it so that the borehole will also look neat.
Shani Haruna:	Would you say the use of the water sources ... The boreholes, wells and then dam results in disagreements?
307...:	Yeah, sometimes that but not always, because something like in the boreholes, sometimes most of ... Especially the ladies they can go there to fetch water, and maybe you see that some person may say that, Oh, I've come first before you. Or some may come and that, oh excuse me to fetch the water because I'm in a harry and the person who is before her will not agree. Sometimes it's normally come to maybe disagreement between them and even in the wells it's the same thing. In the dam too .... Because the dam we are using it for watering our vegetables, crops and so forth. You see to it that some people will say, oh you are maybe ... Because there is ... There are some .... In the dam, we have some place, we call it "paa kpiik". They normally open it so that the water can pass through that area to the crop side. You see that some people would complain that, Oh, that you have over open it. And others would say, Oh, that it's normal. So sometimes it normally bring disagreement.
Shani Haruna:	And how are those disagreements normally resolved?
307...:	Those disagreement it's only just a ... To me I only see it's normally just a minor one. So it's normally just a minor one. So sometimes maybe in the disagreement they will come to maybe understand each other within some shortest possible time. It's just a minor minor one.
Shani Haruna:	So how has the brave Project helped in improving some of these disagreements that you mentioned about?
307...:	Yeah, the brave programs have helped improved these disagreements. That's why they have, yeah, maybe educate us maybe to have polytanks and water reservoirs which maybe during the rain season, we can get water to store in them. So that when it is maybe dry season, maybe you have gone to the borehole side to fetch water for something and you went and there are peoples, because there are some extra water in the house, you can come back maybe manage with that one and maybe return later. Yeah. That's how they have helped us manage with the water problems.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. then what do you think needs to happen to improve water access and management in your community?
307...:	Yeah. To me, I will suggest if maybe NGOs, the government or any sectors maybe can be able to provide more boreholes, more Wells and more dams in the needed places, it will help as a lot maybe minimize those problems.
Shani Haruna:	And how has brave helped to improve your income?
307...:	Yeah, brave has helped me a lot to improve my income through the wearing of animals. During the season, they have taught us how to cater for them, how to look ..., how to maybe inject them, how to feed them and through that one .... Because every year we used to lost most of our animals and because brave has come, most of our animals, we don't lost them as we used to lost them before. So because of that, it has helped us improve in our income generation activities.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	Is there any other information you would like to share with us apart from the ones that we have discussed?
307...:	Yeah, apart from the one that we discussed maybe the information that I would like to add is, these days I don't know but have seen to it that there are divorces throughout the areas, and not only that one, we also experience most teenage pregnancy among students and even in communities. I will suggest if they can help us maybe see how best they can do so that to minimize teenage pregnancy among students and misunderstanding between ladies and their husbands which result into divorce.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	We'll like to say thank you so much for your time and then the experiences that you have shared with us.We are so happy and grateful to you for sharing those experiences with us.
307...:	Okay. Thank you.

 
 
 
Shani Haruna:	This is interview with 308, annon number 011. We would like you to state your full name, your date of birth and whether you are male or female.
308 :	My name is 308 and then I was born in 20th January 1976. I'm a male in gender.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And do you hold any position here?
308 :	No sir.
Shani Haruna:	And then we'll like you to explain what your understanding of the brave project is. What do you know about the brave project?
308 :	Yeah, the brave project is a learning process in which farmers need to have an idea and then as compared to the climate change, how our farming processes goes on, rearing animals and then all what you can talk about farming. So it gives new knowledge and as I said, it is a learning process in which brave is giving to farmers.
Shani Haruna:	Sowhat did you learn under the brave project?
308 :	Yeah. Under the brave project I learned on how we...., the sowing time and then the time we need to apply fertilizer, the time we know we can identify or we determine that this crop is ready for harvesting. And then after harvesting how you keep your products for your expense, either we spend, consume some or you save. So advisories from brave make me understand how we're doing in the community here.
Shani Haruna:	Then, what did you also learn about water under the brave project?
308 :	Yeah, I've learned how we can harvest water for our crops or for our animal rearing. When it is time for the raining season to set off, you have to..., If you want to farm, look at your farm and then you determine how to plough across because if the water is going...., you find the farm slope. So we farm across the slope so that water would not come and wipe the upper soil and then leave it empty. Then apart from that we also made some drums, in order to harvest water till the time rain is not there we can use it for our animals or some of our crops that is nearer in the house.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. What did you also learn about boreholes or wells?
308 :	Yeah, I learned that boreholes are source of water or good drinking water in which individuals or everybody need to adapt using those boreholes or wells. Then, sometimes the wells we use and then the boreholes for our household practice or household consumption and animals. So the boreholes, here we don't have much wells. We use the boreholes for our household activities.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. then what did you also learn about groundwater under the brave project?
308 :	Yeah, we've learnt on the groundwater that, if the groundwater, if you dig the groundwater, that is what we've learn that some of them have disease, like germs which can lead us into sickness. But, the rainwater, if you take the rain water directly that water is different from the groundwater. What I know about it from experts, those who knows the differences in water.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. We're now coming to talk about access to weather information and how you use the weather information in your farming activities. So the first thing we would like to discuss is.... The previous season, last season before the season which just ended. In that particular season, how did you find out information about the weather?
308 :	Yeah. that season, I was access to the information on the weather from the weather forecasters through radio and then community meetings. And then we also joining with district assembly the time they have their PSP meetings. So they always called some of us to be part and then send the information back to the community. That is where I was having access to the information last year.
Shani Haruna:	You mentioned PSP. What is a PSP?
308 :	PSP means Planning Scenario Participation.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Thenapart from those sources that you mentioned, which other source did you get information from? Apart from the radio, the PSP or the district assembly, which other source did you get weather information from?
308 :	Yeah, if we have community meetings here, we spread the information to each other. That is where I got to hear some information. And then again, and on my phone, sometimes the information we're given so that you when the message comes and you read, you get to know information, what the weather forecasters are saying.
Shani Haruna:	So the message that are sent to you in your phone, where does it come from? Who sends you those messages?
308 :	Yeah, actually at first gmet was sending the information through mobile phones so that we can have access to what is going to happen today or tomorrow. And then now.... That one was individuals. But now a message will come from the MTN that, this will happen tomorrow this time, or that will happen. So that is some of the place I also have access to.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So how about this season? The season that just ended, how did you find out information about the weather?
308 :	It's through the mobile phones and then community meetings. This year we didn't join the district assembly for those meetings.
Shani Haruna:	So, apart from those ones did you get weather information from another source?
308 :	Weather information comes from those sources I've mentioned earlier. Gmet also came here and have a meeting with us. They explained how the rains will come this year. So due to their explanation, actually it happens, so it helps us to plan and then sow our crops, determining the time the rain will stop and then the time... The time the rain will come and then the time it will stop. So they use us..... They are comparing us to manga Bawku, that is why we have gotten access to the information. They said whatever is happening there, they believe that it is the same thing happening. And actually it happens. So the time they predicted that the rain rains and then those that they have, they said it has happened. So it help us to plan before sowing just this last season.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And then the weather information that you got, what changes did you do in your farming activities as a result of you getting the weather information?
308 :	Actually, the weather information help in my farming as compared to the last, the previous time. Due to the weather information, the sowing and then I when to apply the fertilizer, you have to look at the weather and then, if you hear from the weather forecasts that tomorrow the rain will come, or there was a time and they said the rain will rain about five days non-stopping. So that time we those farmers who want to apply fertilizer, we couldn't just.... We applied the fertilizer before those come and after that one too they always give information to us so that we know when it will rain or when it won't rain, and due to the one we were able to follow by it. And sometimes their prediction may not be accurate because it can rain here but the next community may not have a rain. So that doesn't mean that their prediction doesn't go by what they said. What they said It help us or me in particular, it helped me.
Shani Haruna:	So what specific activities did you use the information to do? Maybe if you can give us some examples of the activities that information helped you to be able to do in your farming?
Speaker 2:	Yeah. That time you know, there was ..... That time was and the early maturity crops the we sowed. Some people, harvested theirs and then due to rain they couldn't get any sun to dry. So, but some of us who had access to the information, we waited till that time passed. When we harvested, we were able to get enough sun to dry our crops. I in particular I was one. So my .... We call .... This nagaret and then the cowpea. So those millet that time that they were ready for harvest, but due to the rain, we couldn't harvest them. Some of us stopped till the rain passed. But those that haven't had access to it, some of them harvest and it spoilt, it germinated. So those activities, we were able to ..... Then on my onion farming too, people nursed their onions, not having the information that the rain will come for five or six days before stopping. They nursed it and then when that rain come, those who transplant that time and those who nursed rain washed it away. So it means that those activities, I was not part of some of those that spoilt because I had the information. So those that have the information also were not affected.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. how about your livestock? Did you use the information to make some changes in your livestock rearing?
308 :	Yes. livestock rearing they made us to understand that building their rooms have to be different from the previous building which our fathers were doing. If you have your livestock and you want to accommodate them, your building must have some .... During the course of your building you put up some holes so that air will be going in the time these animals will be inside. So air will be going and then the hotness would not harmed them, because too much of hot can bring in diseases for .... So we have changed the style of building our animal rooms and then again, how we feed our animals. Previously we just open them to the bush to the time they are back. Some will not even come back. But due to the learning process that we acquired the knowledge we are able to bring changes to our animal rearing.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So in the future, what do you think is the best way for you to receive such weather information?
308 :	Yeah. In the future, what I intend of receiving weather information is from the mobile phone messages and then radio and then community meetings as to how the rain or when the season set off this will happen, this will not happen. This will .... We should suppose to do this in terms of prevention ourselves and our animals and what have you. And again, what I want to say, is like the CARE link us to the district assembly and then we wrote our community action plans. Whatever we want in the community or any other support. And if you have a disaster, we go direct to them. We need not to pass through the assembly member or any of the big men before we get to the DCE or the district assembly. So just, two or three years back now that one has stopped. So to me, if we get there, if we get back there during the course of the meeting, they speak Kusaal for our people, our opinion leaders to understand what is happening. But without those meetings receiving mobile information cannot help all the peoples than participating the meeting to hear the Ghanaian language speak because most of us cannot read and understand what to see we only hear the information on phone.
Shani Haruna:	So for you you think the best way is to have a community meeting where the information can be shared for everybody to understand?
308 :	So if we called a community meeting for everybody to be there, the inflammation will be given. Even if we call a community meeting and then we can invite the Ghana Meteorological Service people who can be part of us. They will tell us what will happen maybe at the course of the year. So we'll get to know and then prepare. If we had a committee meeting, we can invite those people to come. And then during the community meeting too, we have our local people who said they can perform what and what and then the rain comes. During the meetings, they always call these people to be part and explain, if you see this know that this is what is going to happen. If it is raining shouldn't handle this. This year, they will be, it's going to be a lot of thunders, disasters, what and what. All will be explained to the community to understand because a lot of us cannot hear English.
Shani Haruna:	Then, you also mentioned about radio. Among the men and women here, who do you think listen more to radio? Is it men or women?
308 :	Actually, here due to the education that comes, which makes some women have time to listen to radio. But, previously it was only men who have radios to listen. In the evening the women we'll inside their kitchens cooking and not mine about unless the man listen to the news or the information and then later on transfer it to her. Some of them too, they don't have, they are not allowed to buy wireless or radios which they'll be using personally. If you buy ...... If they buy a radio, in the evening the landlord will open it. He will have time sitting, listening to the news and information, but the woman will be at the kitchen and then doing her work. So after that, the woman ...., the man too will tell her they have announced this, this will happen. But now a few women are able to have access to their radios but not much.
Shani Haruna:	So why are women not allowed to buy radio as you mentioned?
308 :	Yeah, it is ..... It was a .... Maybe it was our tradition that if you are a woman and you buy your own radio and your husband too has his own radio means that you are challenging the man. So that fears they have. So then, like previously we have meeting like this women were not allowed to lead, take leadership, women were not part and then our farming women were not having access to land to farm. Just through this brave education made some women have access to farm on their own and then to make their own fertilizer like compost that we talk. So there are certain things in the community here they have now changed due to the education given by brave.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And then, do think men have more phones than women. And why is that so? If it is so.
308 :	Yeah, now the phones ..... The mobile phones I can say many women have phones than the men. Yeah. I know a lot of men in the community here they don't have time with phones. So women, because they have a lot of their ... Their wards are at Kumasi and this mobile money, if they made the mobile money to me to be giving it to my wife, I may not give it. So it made my wife to have eager to have her own phone to be chatting with the son anytime they want. So as for mobile phones, many women have phones than men in the community.
Shani Haruna:	Then, how often do agric extension officers visit here to give information to you?
308 :	Yeah. though they are not many in the system, whenever we sense of any danger like maybe if a disease and pests disturb our crops, then maybe animals, diseases, if we give the information to them, they can come and convene the meeting, explain to us how we can handle it and so that it won't disturb us. And then, sometimes when the season is about to set off, they'll call us .... How the fertilizer system or how the farm, the season .... In collaboration with gmet they have those similar information to be given. So they can call community meetings and then we come out and they came and make the information for us.
Shani Haruna:	So at those meetings do they provide you information about water management and the weather?
308 :	Yeah, those meetings, they provide information like that, like ploughing across the slope in which water will not just run and leave you or spoil the soil and leave the crop standing empty. So they advise that if you plough across the water will not just run and leave it, the water will stay for some time and then the crop will be able to use it. If without that one the water can just run and leave the crop standing alone
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So we're now coming to talk about access to crop information and how you use the information? So what crops do you farm?
308 :	Yeah, I farm maize, beans, rice, bambara beans and soybeans, and sweet potato too.
Shani Haruna:	So the crops that you have, I mentioned did you plant all of them last season?
308 :	Yes.
Shani Haruna:	And how did you get information about them? Like for instance, if any of them had a disease or if any of the crops was not doing well or if you needed a particular variety, where did you get such information from?
308 :	Yeah, actually the crops that I've mentioned, all of them have a new variety. Yeah. Like first we're doing only millet, but now the maize has a different variety, about three or four types. Then the same thing to the soybeans, the bambara beans, those ones they also have a type and then the sweet potato have a type and then all the varieties, they have so many types. And then if you want to hear information about how, if maybe pest comes to disturb any of them we contact mofa to find out the prescribe chemical to use on the crops so that it wouldn't destroy it. So we had those information from MoFA and then some of us are able to reach SARI manga for the new variety.
Shani Haruna:	So the new varieties that you mentioned, how did you get to know about them?
308 :	Yeah, from the agric extension officers.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And what did they tell you about it that made you to start to use them?
308 :	Yeah, they have ...., it is ..., it is farming. Farming is their work. So the rain pattern that which is not matching with the crops that we normally sow. So due to the rainfall pattern, they have link with gmet to know the crops that will match with the rain. So if you have crops that are drought resilient, so they identify them and then directed us where to get it. So that we went there and had those crops.
Shani Haruna:	So how about the season that just ended? How did you find information about your crops? Where did you get the information?
308 :	Yeah, we had the information from new radio announcements that farmers should change because this time the rain doesn't follow how it was. So the rain pattern has change. Farmers should adapt to the new method of farming by using the new variety and then those that can yield plenty product for us. So in fact the agric people are able to link us by going to the radio station, then calling community meetings to explain to us to understand that we need to change and follow the crops that are resilient with the rain.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So in the future, what do you think would it be the best way for you to receive such Information?
308 :	Yeah. In the future, the best way for us to receive the information is like, I talk of the mobile phone information, the radios and then meetings. So that we're hearing the information when we gather. Then I also like to say maybe MoFA or CARE, if they able to also terrain like we had community Monitors who normally go for a meeting, have the information back to the community here. It was happening, but now it, it look as if it is not active as it was. So that if those people are there, they'll go and take the information, come back and give it to the community. You know, every day we had a VSLA meetings and then if you know that this people have gathered there, the volunteer can just go there and then after the meeting he the give the information to them to also know what is happening. If they do that, I know that getting information to farming will be easier for us.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And then what changes did you make as a result of you hearing the information on the radio?
308 :	Yeah, the changes I did is ..... Like on my farming, if the rain comes the time you need to apply the fertilizer, it is at stake because I know one year after the rains I couldn't wait small for the water to go down small before I apply the fertilizer. So I made the fertilizer application to these crops. Just two hours or after the day, you come and see that the colour of the crops change and it tend to what ... It didn't produce yield better. So I know due those information and then, I didn't repeat such a thing because I've heard what they advise to do, and then waking up early morning using fertilizer to apply crops. They have advises us not to do that. You have to watch the weather and know that supposed to apply or I should stop applying.
Shani Haruna:	So when you watch the weather, how would you know whether it is good for you to apply the fertilizer or it's not good for you to apply the fertilizer?
Speaker 2:	Yeah. Even if you didn't hear information from the weather forecast that today or tomorrow it will rain. And daybreak, if you get up, if you look at the weather sometimes, the weather will change. You see the clouds forming. And then that tells you that we're likely to have a rain that time, or if you see the weather, the wind is not blowing and then it hazy or so like it is shining. So when you see that the day is not clear and the sun is not coming or all that clear. There'll be a day too early morning you see that the sun will start shining and then, the heat will tell you that something will happen today. So there are two different things in the weather there. If the weather is cool and then determine from the clouds, it can be also shining and also determine from the clouds.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	So we're now coming to discuss about the well monitoring training. How did you find the well monitoring training that you received? Well monitoring.
308 :	Yeah. how I understand or find it to be is, when you are measuring the water down in the ground, you give advisories to your people. The time that you put the water goes deep we likely may happen that this borehole may not have water, enough water. So in the morning till evening, just in the morning that they will have some water. But in the evening time, maybe likely not to get water. If it is a well you can see that the water sometimes others will fetch and you go and it finish. So until you wait, it means that the water got finished, goes down inside the ground. So if you measure and the water is up, let the people know how to use it. If you measure it and the water is not enough. Maybe people wants to build, you can advise them maybe to go somewhere and then fetch where the water is plenty. But if you mean to build or to do .... And maybe some are brewers, you can't get enough water to do those activities. So taking the water level in the ground, give us this information to understand so that we don't run short of water anytime we are in need of.
Shani Haruna:	So how were you measuring the water level?
308 :	Yeah, we had an old well in which we use a tape measure. We dip it inside the well with certain metals. Immediately the metal hits the water you would get to know that the metal has gotten .... The end has gotten to the metal. So you remove it. You just hold it there, look at the meter, then you write it inside the room, the time and then how cool or shiny the weather is, you write the time. So, and then the figure
Shani Haruna:	And then those measurements that you took or you made, how would you use them to make changes to your water use in the future?
308 :	Yeah, that is what I said it earlier. If you measure it and then you get to find out that the the level that they dig the well to, water is still plenty, you get to know. If you measure it and the water is not enough in the well. You get to know. So we use this information, tell our people that this time if we joke, we won't get water for our household use. So we have to wait. If you want to build, maybe there is a time you know that there's plenty water and you start building.
Shani Haruna:	Then what other information would you like more information about? Apart from the well monitoring, what other activities would you like more information about with regards to water?
308 :	Yeah, I would like to if, what .... Ghana water commission or what do you call them? If they put or throw their eyes back to the communities. Not only this community alone. We learned that going ...., if you ..... Some boreholes if you fetch the water, you can see that germs will be inside there. So the germs you can take it in and it will harm you and then we don't know how to go by this. So these ones we need to know that if it is this, we are approaching this person for that help. And then, this person is responsible for giving out maybe chemical or the resources that we need to change the water. So we do it. Or else if something like that happens or if the borehole spoil, we always suffer, then contribute money and how to get them it's difficult for us ...., for them to come. If work access maybe in the radio announcement, if we maybe we can be saying that if you are confronted with this problem, like borehole do this, do this, or come to this place for the information or do it. We like it to that ..... So.
Shani Haruna:	Okay,
Shani Haruna:	So we're now coming to talk access to information by both men and women. So in your opinion, do you think men and women have access to different information?
308 :	Yes. As a information on this chieftaincy woman were not part. Even now, some of them are part, but it doesn't ..., they don't have a say, they only listen to what the men say on the chieftaincy side, and the women too also have their information in which men are not even part. Like maybe they have their groups and like the magazia can call women for advisories,as to stay with their maybe families and then, those advises women talk. Maybe sometimes they also gather and talk and men too also maybe in the house like this, the men has a decision in which the women may not take part, like family matters, if not ..., if you are not alone with your wife, if your wife is there, the male ..., the boys or the sons and the father they have a decision in which the woman and the girls inside the house don't even know.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So you mentioned chieftaincy issues. So apart from those ones, what other information regarding development that men and women have differently?
308 :	Yeah, with regards to development, we now have equal information because not only a man can develop a community, but when you come together, a woman can have her support somewhere and then the man too can have a support somewhere. We give out our views ..., like I said we call a meeting to find out who is capable of leading us to this place to have this one to support us develop. So that is why we now have, assembly women and then the men being assembly member. And at the same too, the unit committee and then looking at the chieftaincy side I was talking of ...., may they're also selecting nayili kpema, tendana, what and what, those ones women are not also part.
Shani Haruna:	So why are they not part?
308 :	Yeah. Yeah. They are not Part because men, the role that men can play women cannot play that role. The role that women can also play, they are playing inside. But coming outside to boast that, I am the elder to this chief ...., no. Even if they have the mangazia and then after taking the decision, the chief and the elders will call the mangazia to come and also listen and then give it back to the colleagues or the women.
Shani Haruna:	So when it comes to issues or information about water, do you think men have more information about water than (wo)men? Do you think men have more information about water or women have or get more information about water than men?.
308 :	Yeah. as for water side women had more information than men. Here, men doesn't go to fetch water if not only a single persons, one, one. So women ...., that's their duty to fetch water, prepare food for the family, Fetch water for Washing. And if we are building self the women have to fetch water for us to build. So men doesn't have much information on water than Women. Women had a lot of information from water.
Shani Haruna:	So does that affect the relationship between men and women? The fact that the women have more information about about water, does it in any way affect how the women and men are living peacefully here?
308 :	Yeah. Yeah. It doesn't affect anything because anything about water if the woman hears the information about water, if it is maybe contributing money to repair a borehole or coming out to help physically to repair or make any maybe a dug-out if they go to inform the men they'll come out and do it, because women sometimes cannot lift heavy things. So for that one we understand that what is your duty. You know your duty. I also know my duty and we live peacefully in the community.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So we're now coming to talk about water use, management and disagreements? So what do you normally use water for?
308 :	We use water for feeding our animal, then for household use, then use for building. So I think this is what we use water for.
Shani Haruna:	What about farming?
308 :	Yeah. Okay. We also use water for farming. Yeah.
Shani Haruna:	So, in those activities that you just mentioned, what has allowed you to be able to plan your water use around those activities?
308 :	Yeah, as for those activities, all the waters we use we have different, different types of water. We don't just use ..., maybe we can use borehole water for everything, but it might not be enough. Or if we are many going in for borehole to Fetch water for building, this person will be building and another person will be building somewhere and women will like to fetch and go for cooking and then maybe others want to fetch and go for washing. So we sometimes use the .... Maybe the rain water that we conserve. So, the Wells and some of us who are not far from the dam we also use the .... In other not to suffer before getting water.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So how has the brave helped you to manage water better? The brave project, how has it helped you to manage your water better?
308 :	Yeah, the brave project help us to manage ....., to be able to manage the little water that we have. When it is raining they made us to know that that water is even having more nutrients ...., that water is even is good than the one in the ground we are fetching. And then on our farm side, they ask us and then teach us, when it is raining, then you can make maybe a ridge to prevent water, not to just Slope and then leave the crop standing. And again by not ...., if you sow your crops and you think that all the time it get dried, maybe if you make something like get some grass and then cover it ..., let's say mulching. You cover it so that the wetness will take a long time before it dries, Which could not disturb the crop. So due to those learning we've learned from brave we use and then actually it helped us.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And then you mentioned boreholes, Wells and dams. Do you have organizations here or groups here that are responsible for managing those water sources? The boreholes, wells and then the dams?
308 :	Yeah. actually, district assembly always give us the boreholes. And some NGOs too also come and give us the boreholes. They'll select community members, give them training on how to repair it if it spoils and how to handle it with care in terms of if it spoil, and again the durability, how to handle it so that it will be durable. They 'll call community members and then train them to handle it, and as for maintenance and what and What ..., if we ..., if it spoils we contribute, we have contributions lying down for repairs. So we don't have an NGO or any other person somewhere who can come and then say your borehole .... If it spoils call us to come and maintain it for you. Sometimes if not the politicians ... The time they want their votes if your borehole or your dam needs repairs that time, there that maybe they'll help you small to do it because of votes.
Shani Haruna:	And then how many people are in the management groups? How many are they? Like for each of the groups, how many members are in each group? The boreholes and then the dams or even the Wells?
308 :	The boreholes we have the chairman who always schedule days for the meeting. We have the organizer who will go around inform the .... Give the information that this day we'll meet and discuss about this. We also have the Treasurer, the money that we are contributing ... Those people we have them, and we also have two peoples who are supporting them do the work. So I know about five. We have borehole leaders.
Shani Haruna:	Then in selecting those people, what do you normally look out for before you select them to be member of that group?
308 :	Yeah, we always call a community meeting or let's say a borehole meeting. We ask to select those who will sacrifice and then handle our borehole for us. And then, those that will not feeling maybe lazy. They can say run and do this ... The borehole will spoil for some number of days and you're in borehole committee ... You may not know ... It means that you cannot do the work. So we always sit and then ask to select those who can sacrifice and then handle because we don't pay them. It is a community voluntary work. So we call the meeting and then we ask with community members in the presence of the chief or any other maybe assembly member or leaders in the community to be able to select these people. And, if we select them, we'll let them know what they're supposed to do. And then if it happens that it's a new borehole like, World Vision or any other NGO that comes to give us the borehole they'll call those people and train them how to handle it. So our selection normally done During meetings.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. then does the use of those water facilities ... The boreholes, the Wells and then the dams ... Does it normally result in disagreements?
308 :	Yeah. Sometimes it comes, but it's not all that much. When it comes, it is maybe the contribution. Someone may intend not to pay for some number of years. If you mean to explain to this person and the person doesn't have patience he may tend to say something that is not even normal. So it has happening, but it is easy to resolve.
Shani Haruna:	So the contribution that you mentioned, how regular do you make a those contributions?
308 :	Yeah, it is .... It depends on the number of people using the borehole. Like if you have many houses, let me say if it is an example that 10 houses are using a particular borehole and they say pay yearly, they can decide to pay maybe five cedi yearly or 10 cedi yearly. But you those who are not many, if you also pay five cedi yearly or two cedi yearly, it means that if the borehole spoil, you will not get money to reach how to maintain the borehole. So determine the number of people fetching that borehole. So that they will levy you to pay. The amount that to be able to yearly. It is paid yearly
Shani Haruna:	So how has the brave project helped in improving the disagreements that you mentioned sometimes it comes in thewater use sources?
308 :	Yeah. The brave project helped in the sense that people ... On those payments people just understood that government have given to us ...., it has been given to us by district assembly. If it spoils, we go back to the DCE, or we call the assembly man to come. But due to their explanations and the learning processes that we've learned, if someone gives maybe shirt to you that that person will not follow every day giving you a soap or water to wash it. You need to also handle it, so that it'll help you. So due to those education and then community meetings that talk of ...., people now understand that if we don't contribute and it spoils ...., DCE is not drinking from this borehole, any other person of maybe the NGOs .... , The officials there they don't drink their water here. So it is we in the community that we'll continue suffering. So in that we need to contribute. So it is from the learning process that we got to know that when you give me something I need to take good care of it so that it'll help me. At the first time, people were ...., if you even give some maybe the borehole, they'll be calling that the borehole is spoilt ....., the dam .. You come and do this. They don't even contribute towards repairs. But due to the meetings and the explanations that we're getting from brave it has minimized and I believe nothing like those issues would come back.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	So in your opinion, what do you think needs to happen so that you can have more access to water?
308 :	Yeah. In my opinion, like the study that we are going on, most communities, some of them they are lacking ... Still lacking of water in communities. Some communities they have only maybe one borehole or two and then the the population is too high, plenty. So my intention ... Or what I'm thinking of is like the information always gathered by brave or any other people .... Those who come into any community, should send that information back to assembly and also remind them all the time. Maybe they won't forget about. Otherwise looking at it and then waiting till the time they want to come out with the politics. They can come and give here maybe three boreholes in which we're in need of only one. One will be okay for us. But the politicians will say carry away. They don't follow the right way of distributing boreholes. If this information are able to send back to them and they gather it, I know there will be changes so that we will not be having a problem with access to water. People are still somewhere and they don't have water. Those are even near the river go and then just dug some small portion and water will be coming out from the river so that they'll be fetching in which it won't end up to them nicely or they'll end up by sick. So if this information goes back and then they rectify it to come and support us.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So overall you have been a member of that group for a long time. How do you think the brave project has helped you to increase your income?
308 :	Yeah, yeah. It's helped me. At first when we were not having these techniques others team came with VSLA boxes and some were not eager to join. But due to this education we have children going to school. Their dresses, their Health, their consumption and then any other maintenance in the house. So brave made me to understand that after harvesting, sit down with your wife or the family to decide maybe something ... Make a budget, .... Let us divide this quantity, keep it aside, when we finish consuming this one, we go in and then take some. Then again, let's keep this one aside for our wards' education. Then in case we ..., sickness is an emergency thing, it can come at time. You also keep some aside so that in case maybe anytime, maybe let me say anytime at all wind can come and then blow your house away or it can rain and your house falls, where are you getting that help. No one will come from somewhere and then support you roof it back or rebuild. So you also look at the maintenance side and keep it. At the end, if you finish consumption or if you are not able to finish what you fetch for consumption, you add it and then sell it, buy an animal and then keep it, start rearing. So I believe due to this education, I have adopted and then it helped me. Because after harvesting you won't just keep it, when your wife want to say I want to go to and grind flour ... Go and fetch. So you won't know how to manage it. But if you divide it, you'll be able to manage. This is finishing and what happens to this. So we can even substitute enough. If you planned for this and that one doesn't happen it help us. So planning ..... I know that I'm also one of those who are planning due to the education received from brave.
Shani Haruna:	So I think that's our last question. I would like to say a big thank you to you for your time and the knowledge that you have shared with us.
308 :	Yeah. I also thank you for your time too. And then the delayance we have from the explanation on how community development is. So on behalf of the entire community, I'm warmly greeting you. Then say God bless you and then we have another conversation this time which will support as bring development in their community. Thank you.

 
 
 
Shani Haruna:	This interview is with 309 annon number 009. So sir, we would like you to state your full name, your date of birth and whether you are male or female.
309:	Yeah. My name is 309 and I my date of birth is 12th December, 1980. I'm a male.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	And do you hold any community positions?
309:	Yeah, I'm a community volunteer who works with ..., I'm only a leader. Just a community leader who supports in this thing .... Voluntary works.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Apart from that?
309:	I'm also a unit committee member.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Thanks so much. Okay. So, we would like to know ..., we'd like you to explain what your understanding of the brave project is.
309:	Yeah. My understanding about brave project is they come and then we try to ..., they teach us on our farming activities, on our rainwater harvesting and then we talk about it and then we educate people on radios ... URA radio, etcetera. And then they understand more about how to take care of our animals, how to feed ourselves and how to take ..., you know, how we can do to take care of our crops. So that it'll be fine and then it should not be just farming to eat but farming as a business.
Shani Haruna:	Then what did you learn about water under the brave project?
309:	I learned that we do harvest water during the raining season time and then we keep it and then during the dry season we use it. Either we use some for our crops, we use some to wash our clothings, we use some to give to our animals and feed them. So that's how I learned about water on the brave project.
Shani Haruna:	Then what did you learn about groundwater? That's the water that comes into your boreholes and then the wells for you to fetch for your activities.
309:	We learned that when we ... Boreholes helps us and they are very clean water because it's in the ground. They are very clean and then we use it. So we use some of them to drink and then it's healthy too, to our bodies.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So we're now coming to talk about access to weather information and how you use the weather information. So the first thing we would like to discuss is how did you find out information about the weather last season?
309:	The weather, it was about climate change. We learned something about climate change. And then what we learned last year was ... We understand that the rain pattern will come and then it will move gradually and it will ..., It is going to be successful, so it will help our crops to grow well. So actually what I experienced was that we didn't experience much drought. We didn't also experience heavy rains and everything, our crops were also okay.
Shani Haruna:	Where did you get information about the weather from?
309:	We get this information from brave Project and then we also have info ... People give us text messages about the weather and then we also listen to radio and then they'll tell us that today it will rain, today it may not rain and we get it from text messages too from a project I have forgotten to mention the name but I know it. We get it all the time.
Shani Haruna:	The text messages, Where do you receive it from?
309:	We receive the text messages from rain gauge. They give us text messages all the time. Yeah. We get the message from gmet. They always give us all the time, every ..., anytime at all it is about to rain or they give ... They'll even tell us that within this day, we may experience drought, we may experience rains. So it was from gmet.
Shani Haruna:	Apart from the messages that they send. Which other sources that ... Do they give you weather information... Do they use to give you weather information?
309:	Yeah, we get weather information from radios and televisions. They will tell us that ... We listen to radios and then they normally give news and let us understand that today we may experience rain, we may not experience rain. So we get it from televisions and radios, etcetera.
Shani Haruna:	The radio stations and then the TV stations that you mentioned are they local stations or they're at the national level?
309:	Yeah. they're national stations. I can give example. Like ura radio is under GBC and they give information. We also get some from GTV, we get some from TV3 and then JoyNews. So they're national stations.
309:	And you mentioned you use radio sets to listen to the weather information. Who owns the radio sets that you use?
309:	The radio set that I use, I own it.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So apart from the radio and then the TV and the brave project where you mentioned that you get the weather information are there other sources such as a farmer groups or social gatherings where you get information about that weather?
309:	Yeah, there are other sources. We get it from our colleagues farmer groups. We have farmer groups in Tariganga here who always when it is about to rain, if they get the information they will also pass it on to us. Yeah.
Shani Haruna:	How many of such groups do you have here?
309:	We have ..., actually we are up to ..., the groups are up to two ..., they're up to four or five. And then the group in which I belong to is also one of them and I also give informations too. So they're up to five groups.
Shani Haruna:	Then how did you find out about the .... How did you find information about the Weather this season? The season that just ended, how did you find out information about that weather?
309:	Yeah. Just as I earlier on said, this year, the season that just passed, we understood that it was ... We wouldn't experience much drought, we will not also experience heavy rains. And when ...., and actually that was what we experienced. What we experienced was that we didn't experience much ... Let's say so much ... Long days drought. But we didn't also get heavy rains to our crops, but it actually rained throughout.
Shani Haruna:	And where did you get that .... The information about the weather, which source did you get the weather information?
309:	Yeah, we get it from gmet. We get it from gmet.
Shani Haruna:	Apart from the gmet which other source did you get information?
309:	We get it from our farmer groups too, and radio stations too, we also get them from that place.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. That's nice. So you mentioned you you got information about the weather. Now, what changes did you do in your farming activities as a result of you getting access to the weather information?
309:	I get much improvement on my crops because once I got to understand that this was the time, the season will start and it must gradually go, it has made me to also plant my crops according to that time. And actually this year I got much yield because I followed even any rains that come small. If it is time for me to apply fertilizer or to weed or to do anything, I'll make sure I do it. So it actually helped my crops to grow and then I also got yield.
Shani Haruna:	So what crops do you grow?
309:	I grow maize. I grow soybeans. I grow sorghum, and then millet.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. we would like you to give specific examples on ... For the crops, how you used the weather information to make changes to specific activities for the various crops that you grow.
309:	Yeah, last two years what I got from maize was not all that much. I had about the fertilizers ... The sack ... The size five sack, I got 10 of them, but this year I got up to 15, which I knew it ..., That's the maize. And then last two years I didn't get anything from soybeans because the harvesting time was not done properly. And through this weather I get too, when I followed it well actually I also got soybeans up to size five two. It's the millet that I didn't get much because I didn't actually plant ..., you know, I didn't sow that one much. And the sorghum too I got it. I had the sorghum the small size up to seven of them. Yes. meanwhile last year I had five.
Shani Haruna:	So apart from the yields that uh you had improvement in the yields, what activities, like ... What specific activities in your farming did you change that made you to make or get more yields as compared to the last year?
309:	Yeah. this year what I did was ... It was through this brave training I understood ... I started making compost and then I use the compost to apply on my farm. And then I also planted early and then I weed early. And it is this compost that has helped my farm to get more yield like that because the compost, when I use it to apply on the farm, it helped, I didn't also spend much money on fertilizer as last two years. And yet ..., and I know it is because I also planted early that helped me because those who planted late, some of them didn't get it. They didn't get much yield.
Shani Haruna:	What did you hear about the weather that made you to sow early?
309:	Yeah. they told me that this year the season will start somewhere April-May going to June and actually, that was what happened and they said it may end early. So immediately the rains started ..., it actually started heavy ones, and when it started I didn't relax. I just started ploughing, preparing my land and then everything went on well for me.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
309:	This year too what happened is that especially the maize, I used the improved ones .... Those that can ... You know, maybe that can germinate fast, that uses a shorter period of months before it gives ... So I use that improve one from MoFA and then the soybeans too the same. There are others that when you use it and you don't harvest early, you will not get ..., everything will even remain on the farm. So this year what happened is that I changed the improved ones and then it helped me a lot. And because of the weather understood ..., that's why I earlier on said that the millet, I didn't get it much and I didn't also plant that one much because when I heard that it may end early, I decided not to plant much millet and that's why I didn't get that one much.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So in the future, what do you think is ... Would be the best way for you to receive weather information?
309:	Yeah, I'll be happy if .... At first the weather information that was coming, it was good. But, I need more improvement. If every week or every day I get information from the source that this is what will happen, it will help me actually prepare well and if this information can also be given earlier before the season starts so that we plan it well, it would be good because when it is that today it will rain and it rains today, maybe I have not prepared anything this year ... Just today to do anything. But if you should tell me two, three days coming, this will happen .... This is what is going to happen about the weather, that way it will help you plan towards those two days.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	Do you think more men ... Or men listen to radio more than women here?
309:	Over here dear, to me I would say ladies listen to radios more than men. That is what I know.
Shani Haruna:	Why is that so?
309:	Over here, What I study is that the ladies are always at home every evening and they get information to listen. But men sometimes will move away to their friends. Others will go and they are gathered at a place and they are conversing, they don't have time with radio, even TV. But ladies, they are always at home and then they listen to radio and then even watch TV than we do.
Shani Haruna:	And do men have more phones than women?
309:	If you take the ratio and you compare women and men, women are more than men and these days almost everybody uses phones. So to me, men are only using big, big phones. But the usage of phones, ladies use more phones than men.
Shani Haruna:	When you say big, big phones what ... Can you explain more on that for us?
309:	Yeah. phones that has internet and can access information from the net. They are the big phones I'm talking off. But ladies they are using the phones people call it the "yam". They may not get access, they can only get text messages. But when we are talking about WhatsApp phones, phones that can get access to internet, men use than women.
Shani Haruna:	So why is it that men use ... More men use the bigger phones than the women?
309:	If you compare the education level over here or the illiteracy level over here, more are more literacy done. Women. More men are more literates than women. So because they are literates ..., those ladies who are also literates they use the smarter phones as I explained, but most of them are not literates. Some of them are illiterates. That's why they're using the "yam" phones. They can easily make simple calls.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Then how often do agric extension officers provide you with information about farming activities?
309:	We have agric officers who always ..., who are ...., who goes round to the communities and even we also have one in our community here. He has been coming often. Actually, I cannot tell he has been coming frequently, but not every day, not every week. But at least every two weeks if we have any information he comes to tell us.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Then what kind of information do the agric extension officers give about water management and the weather?
309:	Agric officers always tell us to make sure that we keep our water clean and use it to take care of ourselves and then our family and then the animals. And they make us to understand that once the weather ..., when it is ..., there are some times it will be raining and that water is not good. How to harvest these water to keep, they always tell us to understand that water is more important and we need to use it.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And then we're now coming to talk about access to crop information and use. So, the crops that you cultivate, how did you find out information about them last season?
309:	The crop that I cultivate as I explained maize, sorghum, etcetera. This ... You see we always ..., for the Sorghum, we cultivate it and then we sell it to agric extension, especially PAS-Garu, that is Fara Naaya. So we always make sure that they tell us the prizes they think they will buy for the season. That will encourage us to actually, you know, cultivate it. So for the sorghum we get information from them that and they have been also giving us text messages about how to plant sorghum and how to make it nice so that it'll be marketable. So we get information from those ones. And then for the maize too, agric officers has been ..., they have been bringing some improved seeds and they will advise, advertise it and tell us to always try some. So when we try and see that they are good we pick those ones and leave the old ones that we've been using. So that is how I get information about the crops.
Shani Haruna:	So apart from the agric officers, which other source did you get information about that crops last season?
309:	We get much information from brave project and then we discuss it on radio. We get these informations from them, how we can make our crops nice and how we can get more yield and from our colleagues farmer groups. We also get information from the farmer groups because others will do it and will try to educate the other people too. So we get information from them too.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	So in the future, what do you think would be the best way for you to receive such information?
309:	In the future I would like to always get these informations from ... Now these days ... From my phone. If I get the information from my phone, I can read it and know what will happen. And then it's also good we educate farmers from information centers and then from radios. But if you get it from your phone very fast, you go because we are now in a global world.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Then what changes did you make in your farming activities because of you getting the information you heard on the radio?
309:	At first, I never knew that when you are planting, transplanting yield more than just sowing. But through the radio program, I get to know that if you transplant you get more yield. And then how to also prepare your land by applying compost. At first we didn't even have time with those ones, but through the training I got this to understand that if I actually prepare compost and apply it on my farm, I get more yield.
Shani Haruna:	Did you also make changes in your livestock rearing, and what are the changes that you made?
309:	Yeah, livestock I do some, I do a lot. At first, I never had time with my animals and I never treated them. But through the radio programs and then brave project and then agric extension officers' training, this time I get more improvement because if I see that my animal is not well, I don't just live it. I also treat it and I make sure I provide the necessary food so that I get more of them. So even this year there's much improvement on my goats. I think I have a lot of goats that are around and they don't go far because I feed them in the house, they come to drink water, everything is done in the house for them. So because of that they are not far. They are around my house.
Shani Haruna:	Okay, we're now coming to talk about the monitoring training and how you use that information. So we'll like to know, how did you find the well monitoring training today that you received?
309:	Actually this training, I was not part of it so I don't know much about it that I can explain. So I was not part of the training.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	So we are now about to talk about gender and access to information. Do you think men and women have access to different information here in Tariganga?
309:	Yeah. Access to information, this one, men, they don't get different information because the information we get we also pass it to our ..., the ladies. But sometimes ladies too get more information than us. So it's like for this one, ladies get information much than the men.
Shani Haruna:	Why do a women get more information than men?
309:	When you compare the formation of groups, women are into groups than men. Just some few men have added ... Involve themselves into various groups, but there are other men who are not involving themselves into those groups. And we get information from the various groups that we have. That's why I classified the women to always get ... Have access to information than men.
Shani Haruna:	Do you think men get ... Women get more information about water than men?
309:	Yes of course. Because women they use water most than us. So ..., but the few men who also get the information from water or water information actually also spread it. They are there. But when we even call for meetings like this, women will come more than men.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	And do you think the fact that women have more information about water affects the relationships between men and women?
309:	Actually, it has some ..., the affects .... Over here, you see when women get the information, they also pass it to their husbands and their children. So once they get the information, they'll surely pass it to men, but they will get it first. So it has some effect because definitely they will tell the men to ...
Shani Haruna:	Does it affect the relationship between husbands and wives, or men and women?
309:	Not, not much. It doesn't have any effect. It doesn't affect them much.
Shani Haruna:	We are now coming to talk about water use, management and disagreements. And so what do you normally use water for?
309:	We use water to drink. We use water to prepare our foods. We use water to wash our clothings. We use water to give to our animals. We use water on our crops.
Shani Haruna:	And how do you plan your water use?
309:	During the raining season, some of us have to always make sure that we provide a very big tank that we can store water there so that during the dry season we use it, especially those of us who are far from the dams, and we are also far from wells. And sorry from rivers. Some of us too have to prepare wells. We have to dig wells and then we also rely on boreholes to make sure that we get water for our domestic use.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	So how do you think that brave project has helped you to manage water better?
309:	Brave project has helped us a lot on how to manage water because rainwater harvesting, they were the people who taught us how to keep it. Because during the rainy season it'll rain heavily. All those water will be washed away. We will not keep it for future use. Meanwhile, when it is during the dry season we suffer. So because of that once they trained as to how to harvest water some of us are have now provided a lot of big tanks, not necessarily a polytank, but we provide a hole and we dress it nicely and we keep the water there so that when it is dry season time and then we do not get access to water like that we go in there fetch and use it, give it to our animals. And also some of them too we take it and we wash our clothes.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. You mentioned about boreholes and then wells. Do you have groups or associations or groups of people that are responsible for managing that boreholes, the wells and then the dams?
309:	Yeah, we have leaders who are responsible for managing these wells. We have them. We have a group of people.
Shani Haruna:	Who are those people? What do they do and how are they selected?
309:	They are community volunteers and then we have had a meeting and we select them, ask them to tax everybody to collect tokens, let's say monies so that if there's a fault in any of the boreholes or the wells, they would then use that money to maintain it and make it nice. So they goes round and take monies and also make sure that if you are mismanaging the water, you will be ... You pay more.
Shani Haruna:	In each of them groups, on the average how many people make up a group?
309:	As at now we have five people to a group to a borehole. So these five people, we have the chairman of the group, we have the organizer who calls for meeting, we also have somebody who takes the monies that's the treasurer and the secretary. And we also have ... We always take somebody as a rep for the women.
Shani Haruna:	How are the committee members selected?
309:	It is the community members who call ... When we always come for a meeting we try to select by election. We can ..., it can be an appointment, but we vote based on hands. We don't ... We always raise our hands and support that this person we want him or her to be our leader.
Shani Haruna:	And what do you consider before you choose a person to be on the committee?
309:	We consider a reliable person. Somebody who is also available all the time. We know that this person all the time when we want to get ... When we need him, we can get him. Because there are others who are traveling, who are from far places and they always come home, we don't select those people. We also select reliable people because especially keeping of monies, we make sure that we give it to somebody who we trust and will not spend our monies. And somebody who also have the time, who has the community at heart, that he can always make sure that he gathers people for meetings. So we always consider these things and we'll make sure we do our selections.
Speaker 1:	So would you say the use of the boreholes or wells and dam result in disagreements?
309:	Not at all. But sometimes if somebody refuses to pay, that is where you can see some disagreement between the leaders and that fellow because we've asked that everybody should pay some amount. So if you are not willing to pay that amount and then you want to use the water, that is where you have a problem with the leaders. So that is where we can get some disagreement. But even though we get some, but not much, just some few people who may not have understanding, they are the people who are having those problems.
Shani Haruna:	And in such cases, how are the disagreements resolved?
309:	What we do is that we always send them to the chiefs and the opinion leaders and then they give them advice. Those they think .... There are others too whom we know that they don't just have anything. We are not the same. Those people who do not have anything, we do consider them. But If we get to know that you have something but you refuse to pay, we will always send you to the chiefs and then they ask you questions and then they also sanction you possibly make you pay.
Shani Haruna:	And how do you think brave project has helped in improving some of the disagreements that you mentioned?
309:	Brave project has helped us because the trainings they've been giving to us they make us to understand that if there is any problem, let's try to resolve it at the appropriate place. We should not ... Make sure we quarrel and then we fight and abandon certain things. So once they always train us to make sure that we also involve the community leaders, the assembly members, and then the chiefs, we try to involve them. If you have anything we go there too.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	Then in your opinion, what do you think needs to happen to improve water access and management in your community?
309:	Actually, it will be good if we make sure we have access .... We make sure we have water all over it will help our work ... It will help us actually improve upon our living because there are other areas that we still need more water but we still train them because people will still harvest the raining season water but still if we don't have wells and then boreholes in some areas it will be very difficult to keep that water up to the dry season. So we still need more water in some areas.
Shani Haruna:	And how has brave helped you to improve your income?
309:	Through brave training I have actually improved my income a lot because they taught us how to take care of animals. Livestock and everything went on well. When I followed their practice, I actually got more improvement and then my crops too the same. So their training has helped me actually get more improved yield. And then even with the animals more growth.
Shani Haruna:	So we would like to thank you so much for your time and for your sharing your experiences with us. We're so happy and grateful to speak to you.
309:	Thank you also too because we are also happy and we are grateful. I'm also grateful to ... Actually coming and then being with brave project is a very good one. It has helped me improve my life, so I thank you too.

 
 
 
Shani Haruna:	This is interview with 310, annon number 002. So we're about to start our discussions. So we'll like you to state your full name, date of birth and whether you are male or female.
310...:	Thank you. I'm 310 from Tariganga community. I was born on 1st September, 1980.
Shani Haruna:	Are you male or female?
310...:	I am female.
Shani Haruna:	And do you hold any position here in the community?
310...:	Yes please.
Shani Haruna:	What's the.... What is it?
310...:	I'm a community monitor. We normally mobilize people in terms of meeting or anything going on in the community. Any information that comes we give it to the community people. I'm also a church secretary, Presby Church.
Shani Haruna:	So that's nice. It's nice knowing you now. So the next thing we would like to know is, we want to know what your understanding of the brave project is. What do you know about the brave project?
310...:	Thank you very much. I think my understanding is that they brave project they came into the community to educate us on farming program. Maybe the new variety or the change of the weather and then how to go about it. Maybe like the rain is not coming well or raining well during the season, so the variety that we'll adopt the season for us. So they came and introduced that one to us so that we go about it and it will help us get more yield at our rainy season.
Shani Haruna:	Besides that what other things were you informed about under the project?
310...:	So many things. Example, like even water harvesting, they also taught us about water harvesting and then dry season gardening too and then how to prepare compost or insecticide with nim trees.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. What did they say about groundwater?
310...:	The groundwater. Okay.Thank you. The groundwater, what they brief us about concerning our water is maybe how to go about it to protect it, to make it clean so that we'll use it better in life. And also the groundwater how to maybe harvest water and other thing to help sustain our animals in dry season. So we have so many dug-outs here and that one we mobilize community members to dig that one which will you help our animals to get more water. Even we have boreholes here too and due to the community mobilization and through their education too it has help us get more boreholes through World Vision too, to add into our boreholes.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So, we're now going to talk about access to weather information and how you use it. For the last season, the last farming season, how did you find out information about the weather? The last two seasons before last year. How did you find out about the weather last season?
310...:	Okay, thank you. Through the brave project we do have meeting with them and sometime they brief us concerning the weather forecast and also we hear information from Quality FM, Sun Shine and other FMs. So sometime, agric people they do go to Quality FM to talk about the season, how it will come, how to start it, the time and the date, and the rain that will come first time if it's necessary for us to start sowing, they will brief us concerning that. So we do listen through that. And also we have a Community Information Center. So sometime we do connect to Quality FM so that those who doesn't have a radios in their house to listen they do come to the market and sometimes, if their house are not far they do sit in the house and also listen through that. So sometime it has helped us a lot in this community because we do listen to that one and it serves as a guideline for us to proceed on our farm during rainy seasons.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Then you mentioned that... Apart from those sources apart from the radio and, then the agric officers, which other sources or which other source do you get weather information from?
310...:	That is what I last mentioned it, like the brave project too. They came to introduce those things to us. So they alert us, and through that that we always listen to the FM and also, URA radio because they always come to us, whatever we say they also bring agric officers for us so that whatever we say about it or we list our problems, what we knew and what we doesn't know after that they ask the agric officer to also talk about it. So there that we get more information on concerning on our farm, on our farm so that during raining season we do pass.... The brave people help us to get more information through the agric officers.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. so the radios you mentioned... The radio sets, who owns the radio sets in the particular household, like in a particular household who, who owns a radio set in the house? Is it the man or the woman?
310...:	Mostly in this community it's the men, they are dominating. But the woman too also owns it. Because the information that we always listen is important to us. So everybody wants to listen. So if you're in the house and your husband doesn't have it and you have your money, you can also go and buy it so that it'll help you get more information. So both men and women are also having the radios but men are dominating.
Shani Haruna:	So why is it that men dominate having the radio sets?
310...:	You know, like a community like this, it's like the illiteracy is higher. So mostly the men, they are the landlord. So they used to buy it. But now through this CARE program and other things, it has helped us a lot. So they have made the women to be aware that whatever men can do women too can also do it. So everybody is now struggling, so that if you are a woman maybe evening time you are about to go and sleep, the man will not leave the radio for you because of the children. Maybe they may spoil it. So due to that, the man will send it inside his room and what you wanted to hear you will not get it. The radio is not there. You will not get it. So due to that, it has helped make the women also try to buy on their own radio. So anytime you want to listen to it, you on it, use it, and any time you want you also off it.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. That's nice. So apart from the brave and then the radio stations, do you have other groups here where you can get information about the weather from those groups or associations? The weather information.
310...:	Okay. We have like VSLA groups, we have those groups in this community and World Vision too have organized some groups like that. So every week we do meet to contribute some money. So there that, after that maybe we can chat concerning the season, or information that is around within us we do get it from there and even the market square too.
Shani Haruna:	So that was the discussion around last season where you got your weather information from. So now, we would like to know how... How did you find out information about the weather this season? The season that just ended, how did you get or where did you get information about the weather from?
310...:	First is the brave program because we are still on it. And always they have been coming to educate us on the season, because all the time they do come at least two months or three down or three months or some time getting into the raining season, they will come so that they will educate us on the season that is coming; what to do and what, how the preparation that we should prepare towards the season. We do get the information from them and also all the time they do play it in URA radio for us to hear and then the Agric or the MoFA people also talk to us how to go about it. So I think that's where we get more information.
Shani Haruna:	And apart from the brave or the radio are there government agencies that send you information about the weather?
310...:	No please, we don't have. But about five years ago, CARE people came here and they did that and they do organize some people. They even brought weather forecast men from Accra. So sometimes they do organize a meeting for us so that they will come and talk about it for us to know how the season is coming on, whether it will rain more or less to how the preparation that we should prepare towards it. There that they do advise us the variety that we should sow so that it will help us because the rain, sometime it wouldn't rain up to the month that we want. So due to that, we have to sow the better varieties which will help us get more yield.
Shani Haruna:	And if you say better varieties, what do you mean by that?
310...:	We have like the olden days, the variety that they were using, that one, it will take a long period before it yield. But this one, if the old one would take three months, this one will take maybe two months or two and half. That is why. And we have those varieties in Agric station. And then Manga SARI, they are producing the new varieties and it's also good. So, sometimes we do go there because due to their advice we have tried it and we have seen that it's working.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So I've had some people say they've sometimes they get some weather information from gmet. Have you ever received weather information from Gmet either in the form of text or call?
310...:	As for me, no. But they came to the community, they picked our numbers, they wrote our names, including our numbers and they told us when they go back we will be receiving information concerning the weather. But as for me I didn't get it, but most people had it, that they do text them.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So you mentioned you've been receiving weather information from the brave project and then the radio programs. Now we would like to know, what changes have you made in your farming activities as a result of you getting the weather information?
310...:	Okay, thank you. The changes are many because as at now we are always using the new variety. The old one, we are not using them anymore. So we have stopped using them and through their advice every year you have to buy the new variety of crops to sow, specially maize, soybeans and other crops. So sometime we do sow late because here you will not get the cow for them to plough for you faster. The men have to finish ploughing theirs before they go for the women's own. So if you mean to sow the olden days or our local ones, you will not get anything, you end up getting nothing. So for me, I always go to a agric station to buy the new variety of maize and the other crops to come and sow. Even sometime if I sow, maybe late, at least I will get something. So I've seen so many changes in them and even especially the compost and then the insecticide. You know the nim tree, if you use that one it's not harmful and it's even easy to come by them and the materials are within us, you get them here without buying. And even if you buy, it's not costly. Maybe one cedi or two cedi, it's not costly. So I think that one too is good. It has helped us a lot. So as for me, these changes have helped me and I will always do that.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Thenwhat changes have you made in your livestock rearing? Or you don't rear livestock?
310...:	I rear, but just recently that I started because where I was, we were in the family house and the people are many there and you know in a family house it's not easy for a woman to rear. But now that we have moved here, I've started doing something.
Shani Haruna:	So what's... How have you applied the information in your livestock rearing? Even though you just started how has the information helped you?
310...:	Thank you. They advice us to get, maybe after harvesting your crops, you gather the waste for your animals, you don't throw them away or you don't leave them like that. So I've gathered so many of them. If we enter here, you will see them, they're there. So that maybe dry season in like this a time will come that the animals will not get food outside to eat. So that time that I use to fetch that one to give it to them.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Still discussing about the weather and access to weather information. So in the future, what would be the best way for you to receive information about the weather? What do you think will work best for you if they were to send you weather information?
310...:	I think through phones will be better. And also the radio stations.
Shani Haruna:	Which other means will be good again?
310...:	Okay. Even the community meetings. If we get information in the community meetings I think that one too is good, or the community leaders. If you get to the community leaders, they will also mobilize the community meeting to inform the whole community on it.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. In your opinion, do you think that men have more phones than women in the community?
310...:	Yes, please.
Shani Haruna:	Why is that so?
310...:	Most people, it's not easy in the community here. Though the education is now high but still it's not easy because those who doesn't have work and especially the farmers, to get money to buy phone is not easy unless the child or somebody give it to her. But the men, they force to get it because they are always, they always farm and the women are supporting them, so they have access to do whatever they want. If they harvest they can say sell this thing for me, or they have or they are rearing. They can sell their cow or the goat or sheep and even the fowls, they 're there. But woman doesn't rear much here because you are not owning it. Even if you are rearing it's for your husband, you can't go and catch it and sell that oh I need money to buy this. You can't do that. That is why men are having more phones than woman.
Shani Haruna:	You mentioned that the women only support their husbands in the farms. Will you be able to explain that in detail for me?
310...:	The man is the landlord. So they're using their powers. He would say that, I brought you in the house so you have to follow me, do whatever I want. You can't do whatever you want. But we thank God that through these educations and the brave project, it has changed some of them because looking at olden time woman you don't have access to even farm. To get farm self it's not easy, to get a land and farm. But now the men have released their land for the women to also do something to support them, but first it wasn't like that. As a woman you don't have access to do anything. You are only supporting your husband. That is why I'm saying that, though changes have come but it's still there. Not everybody who have changed, some are still there who haven't changed and they expect the woman to follow him to do whatever he wants. After harvest he will fetch for you; You take this, prepare food for us to eat. If it finished, the woman have to alert the man to give the food they again. That is how they are doing here.
Shani Haruna:	What do you think can be done to change the situation?
310...:	I think through this information the brave program, the information that we are getting from the FMs, the community meetings and the leaders in the communities, I think some people have changed. So others should also learn from those who have changed. And I think after maybe playing these programs or educating us on these things, the more that they hear, I think the more that they will also change.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So, the other issue we would like to ask about is the visit of extension officers here. How often do extension officers visit here?
310...:	Even a year, maybe twice. And we've complained so many times to them and what they are saying is that they are not many, that is why it's like that. And even our animals, if they are sick and you need them to come and inject self it's problem. How to get them..... So sometime we talk to them to maybe also train some people in the community. So in terms of that we can get them faster for them to help and they're saying, yes, they will do that. But we haven't seen it, but thanks to God, we have one or two people in the community here, they are doing that. So sometime we do call them. If you have your money you can buy your drugs for them. So any time you want the injection, you contact them to come and inject for you so that you also pay them some small token.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So those people that you mentioned are they trained by the MoFA?
310...:	I don't think. It's only one person that I know that maybe trained, but I haven't consulted him to know much about whether he went and trained for himself or it's the MoFA puppy people who helped him.
Shani Haruna:	So when the agric extension officers, they visit, do they provide you information about water management and the weather?
310...:	Yes, they do provide us. They do inform us how the weather have changed. The changes that have come. We should also change and follow the way the weather is.
Shani Haruna:	And what do they tell you about how to manage your water?
310...:	Now? We have, we are in dry season garden. So they do inform us so that we should dig a small this thing, dug-out, we should do small dug-out so that anytime the water come, it will last for us to use it on our dry season gardens. Because at this time, we are on onion and vegetables seasons. So during raining season we should, eh, they also taught us water harvesting, how to get more polytanks or containers that will store water for us. But here we don't have those things, because the polytanks, the money, how to get them it's not easy. But we are having a dam here. So what we normally do is that we go to...., They will open it for it to come. So you can also get someone, maybe two or three people to help you dig your own well small so that the water will come, you will be using it for some time. So by the time that it will finish, they will open it again for you.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. How do you normally get access to the agric officers? In the absence of the brave project, how did you access the agric officers?
310...:	We have some of their numbers and so sometimes we do call them, and also through Care they came into them and they also brought them into this community. So through that we know them much. We know most of them. So anything at all, if you call them or we go there, we go to agric station, it's easy for us to get them and even the MoFA people. As at now we are into contact with them, so anytime we need anything we should come, We shouldn't hesitate.
Shani Haruna:	Okay, that's nice. So now we're now going to talk about access to crop information and how you used those information. So for your farming last season, how did you find out information about your crops?
310...:	Okay, the crops, we have more information. That is why I said earlier that we get information from radio station, the brave people, the mofa and the agric and we do get information from them, and we even have one person in the community here. He's now working with agric station. So any information that comes sometimes he do bring it to us.
Shani Haruna:	So how about this season, how did you find out information?
310...:	It's through the brave project and then agric station, radio stations; through that and sometime community meetings. That's where we get information. Even in the churches too, any information that comes, sometimes they do announce it in the churches for us to hear. And then the market square too.
Shani Haruna:	So what happens.... In a community in meeting what normally happens?
310...:	They do mobilize. The people will come together so they brief us on the season that is coming and how we should prepare ourselves towards the season, whether it would rain heavily or not. Maybe sometime they do predict that this year looking at the way the wind is blowing, we will get more rain or looking at the way it is this year we will not get more rain. So maybe from this time to this time, if we get rain, everybody have to start sowing. So through that each and everyone will bring his or her view to that.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Then, in terms of such information and the various methods or sources that you have mentioned, what would be the best way for you to receive such information in the future?
310...:	From the weather people.
Shani Haruna:	Information about the farming activities?
310...:	The agric people and then mofa people too. They are together. They're working together. So always we get information from these people and then also get from these people. So I think in future if they continue with their work, it'll help us.
Shani Haruna:	When you say agric and the mofa people, are they two different groups of people?
310...:	Yes, please. Yes. They are two different people and they are working together too.
Shani Haruna:	Who are the agric people and who are mofa people?
310...:	The agric people I think they're into the farming. Maybe the variety of crops, the crops that we should sow and then crop that we shouldn't sow. So they always advise us to use the new variety of crops. So they will bring it for us to buy and sow. So always they advise us to get the new variety of crops. And after that too, they will also buy some of them like sorghum, soybeans and other things. They also.... They are weighing them. So mostly if yours are many, I think if you send to their place, I think that one would be better than sending it to the market women for them to buy. And the mofa people too, they also help us in our livestock and then the fertilizer that we should use, they advice. They also advise how to use their fertilizers too. That's what I know about them. I think the agric people, they are in an institution by Presby Agric Station and then the mofa they're under government, they are from government.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. That's nice. So from the information that they brought to you what changes did you make to farming activities?
310...:	Okay. The changes is that now I've got access to get more land to farm as the quantity that I want. Though it's not free. Maybe you get something small for the person. Sometime you buy one fertilizer bag for the person so that he will also release the land for you to farm. So I have extended my farm due to their advice that I have been following. It has helped me get more yield every year. So I used to.... As at now I'm into it and I'm even farming more. At first I don't farm. But now I think the farming helped me a lot because I will not buy food. First I will not buy food. The food is already there. It's left with the maybe petty petty things that I may need it. And sometime I do fetch it, sell it and buy whatever I want and even help in our children's school fees and other things too.
Shani Haruna:	You mentioned you farm what are the crops that you farm?
310...:	That's maize and then soybeans, and then dry season gardening too onions and vegetables.
Shani Haruna:	What kind of vegetables do you grow?
310...:	"Aleefi", "ayoyo" And then we have some other ones I don't know the name of it; the "bittor" and then the "berigise", that's how we call it in our local dialect.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So we're now coming to talk about well monitoring. How did you find the weld monitoring training that you received? Did you take part in a training on well monitoring?
310...:	No, please. I didn't.
Shani Haruna:	You didn't take part in a training on well monitoring?
310...:	No. I don't know of this year, but maybe some years back, about five years back, Care people did that. It's a long time.
Shani Haruna:	What did they teach you about?
310...:	They teach us about how to sow the crops. I think I didn't do that. I didn't take part on that one. Yes. And I didn't take part in the training on the well monitoring.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So we're now coming to talk about how men and women have access to information here. So in your opinion do you think that men and women have access to different information?
310...:	Yes, please.
Shani Haruna:	How?
310...:	Yeah. Sometimes men do meet together, have their information, maybe chat on whatever they want and women to also meet at their group too. So sometimes we have a group that all of us can come together and meet and sometimes we do have a group that only men and only women who are into that group. That is why I said they have different information.
Shani Haruna:	So what kind of information do men have and what kind of information do women have differently?
310...:	Yeah. Thank you. Sometimes in the community, maybe community meeting, if the chief is having any information he do call the men to brief them. They should.... They don't add women there. And if you a woman you can't go there, if you are not invited you can't go there. And sometimes too, we have some meeting that they do call women to inform them, but to come together sometime maybe if they are having a maybe assemblyman or any other party there that we do come together or weather information, a community meeting that we do come together. But in terms in the community well or moving forward, they have to sit with the leaders of the community or men in the community before it comes up to reach the women.
Shani Haruna:	And why do they have to sit with the men first before they will now come inform the women about the information later?
310...:	Okay. As for that one I don't know, but looking at some years back, at first, women, they don't value women in the community like that. Because first, anything that is happening in the community, women are not part. Just now that they have started adding women into any meetings. But first it wasn't like that. So those things are still there. Though changes have come, but it's still there. Not everybody who have changed, but I think gradually it will totally change.
Shani Haruna:	So do men get more information about water than women?
310...:	Yes.
Shani Haruna:	Why do you think so?
310...:	It's true. Because if anything they do call men first to inform them. They will come out to also inform their wives or after they have finished deciding there that they will come out to inform the women. Because like the dam that we are having here, any time they're having information sometime they do call the men to decide whatever they are going to do before they are also reach to the women because men are having more ..., they are farming more than the women or they are having access to land than the women. I think that is why.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And do you think that the fact that men get more information about water than woman, does that affect the relationships between men and women?
310...:	Yes. It affects.
Shani Haruna:	How does it affect?
310...:	Because as at now everybody is a farmer and what men can do, women too can do better, to my belief. So I think if there's any decision they should involve the women. Maybe our decision too can help us move forward because we are having children. So we know much about a relationship between human beings. I think we have that more than men, because men they always get up, go out, do whatever they want or go to their farm. But as for the woman you will be in the house, study everything in the house with the children. You will know much about human being than men. But their concern is that..., as for women they don't value us, but sometimes we also have more decision than men. Looking at now changes have come. Those who are famine in the community here the woman, some of them get more yield than the men because any information that they hear, they put into practice but men, they are not easy to convince. But we women, we are easy to convince. That is why I'm saying that we are equal. So sometimes they should give us chance to also bring our views.
Shani Haruna:	So we're now coming to talk about water usage, management and disagreements that results from such usage. Okay. Sowhat do you think has allowed you to plan your water usage better?
310...:	Okay. Thank you. The way I manage my water in the house and then in the farm, I have more containers. Sometime if the water comes, we do feel them and be using it gradually, after it finished we then go and fetch it. We don't misuse to fetch today tomorrow you fetch small small. We don't do that. Always fetch more so that it will take you three, four days before you go and fetch it again, and even if you want to do washing, we do wash weekly. Maybe Saturday morning we just fetch it once wash our things and keep it for the next week again. That is how I'm doing it in the house.
Shani Haruna:	How about the farm? What has helped you to manage your water use better in the farm?
310...:	At farm, first we didn't know that we have to maybe dig our wells small for the water to come. So sometime they will open it, you just water your things maybe two days, three days the water has finished again and you be sitting down waiting for the people to open the dam for you to get more water. But now this changes have come so they have educate us how to reserve your water. So we do organize dig the well so that if the water come inside it will last sometime for a week for you to be watering on your cross. By the time that you will be thinking that it will finish, the water will come again. So always you will have water, you will not have problem on water.
Shani Haruna:	So how has the brave project helped you to manage your water better?
310...:	Thank you. At first we didn't know that you have to buy more containers or fill your water, reserve it. All the time we just fetch it, use it and leave it like that. The next day, even uncovered, it will spoil, you have to go and fetch another one. But through their education, it has helped us to know how to manage water in the house. We will have to buy a nice containers with covers. When the water comes, you just fill them. And even raining seasons we have to fill. We do harvest the raining water, fill our containers, keep it and be using it small small for some time, so that may be by a week it'll finish and you then go for another one. So the same way that we are doing. If the boreholes are there we just go and fetch it, keep it find a day or a time, fill everything in the house and be using it small, small. By the time it'll finish, you also get time to go and fill it again. So anytime you are out and you are in, you don't have problem with water.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. You mentioned boreholes and then wells. Do you have organizations that are responsible for managing them here?
310...:	We have a community leaders. They have choose some people to look after it and they are taking care of them. We have some people who are the.... They have been chosen by the community people to care of it.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. How many are those people? How many are they?
310...:	I think they are five. Those I know are five.
Shani Haruna:	And what do they do?
310...:	They always monitor. Every morning they will go to the borehole to check and then make the place clean. They wash it, make it clean so that if it's not clean, sometime the first people that will come, they ask them to clean it before they fetch the water. And sometime every month too we do contribute something to keep, in terms of any problem they use that money to maintenance the boreholes.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So how did they choose those people?
310...:	The community leaders came together to choose those people. And then after that they call a community meeting and introduce the people to the community people that these people are in charge of it. So in terms of anything we should contact them. And those who are building houses and they want water, they will go to them, they will charge them to pay this amount. And even the community as a household they have a specific amount that everybody have to pay per month or a year, sometimes a year for us to pay so that they will keep that money in the bank. They even ask them to open bank account and be keeping that money inside there so that anytime we are facing problem on our boreholes or wells they will just go and withdraw that money to maintenance them, and they have even trained some of them. As for minor ones they can do it for us.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And then how has the brave project helped you to increase your income?
310...:	Okay. Thank you. The brave people have helped us. They always advise us to do more farming and then the dry season, they way we should do it, so through that it has helped us. And even our livestock, how to rear. So through that we get more money and more income from it because after you harvest your maize your soybean, your animals are there. So it has a time if the year is coming to end and then, and we are getting to a rain season time, maybe the meals are there, you have ate and you know that oh this one that I have left it will even end me to another year. So due to that let me quickly sell this to support myself. So sometimes that is how we are doing and then the soyabean and other things, the intercropping - they introduced to us and we did that and it has help us. So we do use them to sell it to support our children in school.
310...:	In terms of health sector, if the child is sick, you yourself, I think that one you don't have problem to go outside to beg for somebody to help you. Now that you have those things you just sell some of them, go and solve your problem. And we are into VSLA groups too and that one too, we contribute every week. So if you're having any problem, you can go in weekly to borrow that money. In terms of major emergency side, you borrow that money use to help yourself solve the problem that you have. Maybe after a month or two months time you make your ways to then pay back and pay some small interest to it. So it's through their effort that it has help us get more money or get more income.
Shani Haruna:	Then would you say that water usage here sometimes results in disagreements?
310...:	Yes we do have disagreement, especially the dams. Sometime we may need the water and they will not open it. Maybe they will ask us to pay this amount. Some will pay some will not pay. So due to those who haven't paid, sometime they will not open it. Even if they open it, those who are nearby the dam, they will block it and leave it the water to get more into their wells so that they will be using it. They will not leave it to come far due to those who haven't paid. So they will do that and your crops will get dry. So due to that it sometimes create problems for us.
Shani Haruna:	How about the boreholes what disagreements are usually reported or have you experienced?
310...:	As compared to last year, the boreholes we were having.... In the market here we were having one borehole here. So those who are using it are many. So we do go this one will say I came first and this person will say I came first. Due to that they will be quarrelling each other and somebody will bring two cans; you want to fill it before somebody will fetch. So sometimes I will say that I came and queued. Now is my turn for me to fetch. You want to fetch two, keep the other one here, send the other one home and come and pick it. Why won't you fetch one, send it and come back. By the time you will be back somebody too have fetch, maybe two, three people have fetch and you fetch it again. So sometime they are in agreement with that one too. But we thank God, World Vision came into our aid and last year, so they help us with a mechanised borehole in the the clinic here. And then they brought it in the market square here and they extend it to another house down there and then another house down there. So now we don't have problem on that one. So if you come and they haven't opened this one, the market one, we just go to the old borehole fetch it. For now, this year we haven't encountered any problem in 2020.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And then how has that brave helped in improving or resolving some of those disagreements that you used to experience?
310...:	Come again.
Shani Haruna:	So how has that a brave helped in resolving or improving these disagreements?
310...:	Thank you. They, the brave people help us to improve disagreement because they taught us how to maybe to make your own dug-out or come together as a group, make your dug-out, which will help you get more water for your animals and for your crops. So I think what they have helped us is that, and we did that too and it has help us. So now if they open the dam, the water will be there more. You will use it, animals will come and drink it and it will be there, last for a week and sometimes even more than that. And they will open. Sometimes they open it three days, three days. But the time we didn't know how to manage it they will open it three days, in the next two days it has finished. How to get water and water your things and animals to get self is not easy. The animals have to travel far but due to their education it has help us. So now we don't have problem with that one. Individual will do your own small one dug-out so that the water will be in more, it'll last for you to be using it without encountering any problem with anybody.
Shani Haruna:	Would you like to invest in digging your own well?
310...:	Yes please. I think I would like to do that.
Shani Haruna:	And what would you use it for?
310...:	I'll use it in watering my this thing. In the household... I will use it in the household like preparing food, washing and other things. And I have plant some mangoes and other trees here, so I'll use some to water them.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Then why would you want to invest in your own? Well,
310...:	I think that one will help me. If I get my own well, I don't have problem with anybody. Anytime and whenever you want, you just go and fetch it, you will not have any problem with anybody. And the way you will make it neatly or nicely, as a community one you not get it in that way; You'll clean it nicely somebody will come, step on any faeces or animal faeces, come and stand on that and due to that it's not safe at all. But if you get your own well, you can make it clean, cover it well. Then the way you would be using it, it will not be like the way the public one people are using it. That is why I want to have my own well.
Shani Haruna:	In your opinion, what needs to happen to improve more water access and management here?
310...:	Okay. What I will do is that...
Shani Haruna:	So what needs to happen to improve water access and management?
310...:	Okay. In the community here, now politicians are coming because 2020, we'll be having vote. So MPs Ministers, assembly members are coming in the community. So sometime we do have a community meeting, list our problems - what we want, our needs. So we list them. So anytime they come we give it to them, so that we need this area, need water, this area, need water, this area need this, so that if you can help us then we vote for you. So sometimes we will do that or we will inform them. And because they need our thump, they will definitely help us. And we did that to previous years so now they are digging a toilet here for us. The MP is doing that. So I think if we continue with those things, I think we would get more water. By 2025 the whole community will be surrounded by water and we will not have any problem. Like even the World Vision have even come out to support the community. So there's a mechanised borehole. So if you need it in your house, if you have any small money, they will help you pull it for you.
Shani Haruna:	So apart from maybe the MPs or World Vision, what can you as a people do to have more water on your own?
310...:	We come together and the community, those areas who doesn't have, we can even come together, contribute something to help dig borehole or a well for that area because previous years that is how we normally do when water, weren't there, we have to come together, contribute, use our own strength to dig the well.
Shani Haruna:	So thanks so much for your time and the experiences that you have shared with us. We are most grateful to for your time and then the knowledge that you have shared with us.
310...:	You're most Welcome. Thank you very much too for your support and what the brave people are helping in the community. So what I will say is that we thank you and God bless you, and we are always around. So in terms of anything, you come to us, whatever we also have, we'll give it to you. Thank you very much.

 
 
 
Shani Haruna:	This interview is with 401, anon number 008.
Translator:	I'm Sahadatu Mahama, a translator from 401 to Mr Shani.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	We'd like you to state your full name, your date of birth and whether you are male or female.
Translator:	I am 401, 48 years old and I'm a man.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Do you hold any community position?
Translator:	He's a council of champion imam. He represents imam in council of champion and he's organize in health volunteer committee.
Shani Haruna:	So okay. So now we would like him to explain what his understanding of that brave project is.
Translator:	My understanding in brave project is that we are learning .... We're learning about farm activities like farming, how to farm to get good yield or how to rear things. As now .... As previous what we are doing, we should change to this time around farming. I understand that we should change our farming activities. As we were doing in the past.
Shani Haruna:	And what did you learn about water under the brave project?
Translator:	My .... I've learned about water in brave project on harvesting .... Water harvesting ... Rainwater harvesting. I have learned how to harvest rainwater and it will .... And the management of it, how to keep it clean, how to use it, and my work at both house and farm activities.
Shani Haruna:	What did you learn about groundwater, the water that comes into the boreholes and Wells, that you fetch.
Translator:	We have boreholes and wells. But now .... As at now we are using the wells because we have broken down boreholes and the wells too we have lids in which we fetch and close for safety and clean water for drinking and bathing.
Shani Haruna:	So what did you learn about the wells and then the boreholes in the brave project?
Translator:	What I've learned is whenever we are able to repair our borehole, we should have somebody to be there as a security to look after the boreholes in the community. We shouldn't leave it as how it is.
Shani Haruna:	So we're coming to talk about the weather information and how you use it. How did you find out information about the weather last season?
Translator:	I've heard the information weather information that the period that the rain will start the month and the month that it will stop, it will end.
Shani Haruna:	When did they say the rain will start and when did they say it will stop?
Translator:	They say it will start at April and end at October. And that was how it done for the year.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And did it match with what he was expecting?
Translator:	Yes, it was done by what he was expecting.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And where did he hear that information about the weather from?
Translator:	Agric extension officers came to this community and I heard it from them.
Shani Haruna:	Apart from the .... Apart from the agric extension officers, which other sources did he hear weather information from?
Translator:	I heard it from the community monitors who are recording the rain gauge and Tamale Zaa radio station.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Then, how did the extension .... The agric extension officer, how did he get the information to him?
Translator:	He came for a community .... And gathered the community members and just informed them. He came because of that and just informed the community people, and he was part of that meeting.
Shani Haruna:	And what information did he give them about water management and the weather?
Translator:	As he talked about the management, he says we shouldn't contaminate the water, the stream water by putting DDT in that water, or fencing. We should fence our hand-dug wells, which we dig in our farms for drinking or for our farm activities and where .... The valleys that we have fishes people, the cattle used to drink from that valleys .... That ponds .... But the children went to put it .... Convey it away for fish. We shouldn't let children go and do that so that we will manage it for our cattle.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Then how did you hear about the .... How did you find out information about the weather this season?
Translator:	I heard the information on weather that there will be heavy rainfall this year and I heard the onset of the rain of this year and apart from the heavy rainfall we should .... We have the period that it will take for this year.
Shani Haruna:	When .... Which month did they say the rains will start and which month did they say it will end?
Translator:	The onset date was April ... Month was April and the say it will end early first week of November, but it was second or third week of November that it ends because it was above what they said. So it was said by gmet people at brave project meeting.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And when you heard the weather information, what did you use it for?
Translator:	Because it was said that the rain will prolong the time we have to .... We would have plant or sowed our bungu, we didn't sow that time. We wait for the next month and sowed and upon all that, because it rains over, the bungu too have done what ever it is going to do.
Shani Haruna:	So originally, which month were you going to sow the bungu?
Translator:	By October going to November so that by December you would have finished harvesting and .... But up to now, some are still working with them ... In them.
Shani Haruna:	Apart from the bungu, which other crops do you farm?
Translator:	So because of this information of heavy rainfall he went and bought wandata andcultivate late maize .... Cultivated late maize.
Shani Haruna:	Apart from the varieties, which other activities in the maize cultivation did he change because he heard weather information?
Translator:	I cultivated maize and millet first and later on I ... Because of the heavy rainfall I heard the information that I've cultivated the late maizee and the bungu.
Shani Haruna:	In which month did you sow the maize?
Translator:	I cultivated the maize in June, early June.
Shani Haruna:	And originally were you intending to sow in June you wanted to sow earlier than June?
Translator:	It was difficult for me to had .... Lack of tractor services that .... It was lack of the tractor services that I sowed it on June, but I wanted to sow on May.
Shani Haruna:	So, did the weather information you heard ..... Did it help you to make a decision on when to plant your crops?
Translator:	Yes, it's helped me to prepare when .... To decide when to plant, to plow my farm.
Shani Haruna:	So how did it help you?
Translator:	When we were not hearing the information, weather information, we used to plant ... To sow our farms or to plough our farms whenever we ...., even February if it rains we will go and plough or sow ... March, we will go and do that. But since we have been hearing weather forecast and gmet people are telling us the onset days and what and what, we use to follow that onset days and plant on April going. So that helps us. That's why I heard it and I took it to practice and it helped me a lot.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So in the future, what is the best way for you to receive weather information?
Translator:	I would have prefer if brave project would've been coming with gmet people in this community at Jawani, I would have preferred that than not heareing it, but if not that I would like to be hearing it from radio stations.
Shani Haruna:	Which induce station?
New Speaker:	I would prefer hearing the information from Nobel radio or Tizaa radio, Eagle FM and the community rain gauge recorders ... From the community rain gauge recorders and Zaa radio from Tamale. The specific one is Nobel radio or Tizaa radio.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So, men and women who listen to radio more than the other?
Translator:	Women who are interested in listenng for radio discussions listen it more .... Have the information more than men because men used to operate it and just went away. He will do it and go out and leave it hanging in the yard talking. So women, if you are concentrating in that ... You are interested in radio discussions you listen more than the man. So women are listening more than the men.
Shani Haruna:	And do men have more phones than women?
Translator:	Women have more phones than men because we have .... The reason why women have phoness more than men are .... Most of the women are holding the phones because of the musics and films .... Viewing musics films in their phones. That's why they ..... Especially the youth girls ....they used to buy phones for music and film.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And what information do agric extension officers give about water management?
Translator:	That we shouldn't contaminate our water with poison. We shouldn't let children convey the water from pond for fishing. We shouldn't ... We should fence our drinking hand-dug wells in the farms, and we should have bonding and Tie ridging in their farms to manage the this thing .... Moisture conservation, and they should do ploughing across slope and they should level the plough land before sowing.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	The crops that you grow, how did you find out information about them last season and this season?
Translator:	I had the information from agric office and radio stations.
Shani Haruna:	And in the future, what would be the best way for you to receive such information?
Translator:	If the agric people or gmet people would have come to our community and give us the information, should've been better than hearing it from radio stations or another districts.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	So the informations you have been hearing on the radio, what changed did you use it to make in your livestock rearing or livestock activities?
Translator:	For the hens he used to get a veterinary officer to come and immunize them when the this thing ... Harmattan has not yet in. Otherwise, for the past years he didn't know about that so when harmattan comes it clears all the this thing ... Farm birds like cocks and hens. But so far as brave projects have educated us on how to change our livelihood activities He decided to get a veterinary officer early for him to immunize them before the harmattan comes.
Shani Haruna:	So apart from the immunization, what are other changes has he made?
Translator:	I used to just leave them outside and be saying this is my hen, this is my cock. But now I guide them inside the yard and if not in the morning I'll not open, and if I open then I will find Millet or corn for them to eat.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So how did you find the well monitoring training that you received?
Translator:	I trained .... I took the train on monitoring of the borehole and it was to measure the borehole and see whether the level of the water in the borehole, whether it is going down or coming up and the time that it is up and the time that it goes down.
Shani Haruna:	So when you measured the water level, what did you use that information to do? How did you use that information?
Translator:	I didn't understand the measurement ..... The details of the measurement so I couldn't use it to inform or to do any activity for my own.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	Do you think men and women have access to different information?
Translator:	Yes, they have different informations because if it is men's side, men have their information more than women. And if it is, the information is from the women's side, women have more information than men.
Shani Haruna:	So what kind of information normally concerns men and what kind of information also concerns only women?
Translator:	Both men have their information different and women have their information different. Because if it is funerals side, women have more .... They are more people there .... Outdooring and wedding ..... Women are more there and they have their information there. And if it is farming side, men are more and men have their information from that place. So men have farming side information and women have funerals and .... Because they cook there. So they have more information. They gather than men there.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And do men get more information about water than women?
Translator:	Women have more water information than men because women used to fetch water. If it is from the well, they know that this well water is still there or is finishing. And if it is the stream water women fetch stream water and they know this water is good or this water has contaminated. So that's why women have more information about water than men.
Shani Haruna:	So why don't men have more information about water?
Translator:	Because women fetch water and they have the use more than the men.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	And why are men not ... Why do men not fetch water?
Translator:	Men are not fetching water because they bring the woman from their house to his house and the woman is responsible to fetch water for the man. So they used to go and fetch the water. That's the responsibility for the woman to fetch water for the man.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	So we're now coming to talk about water use, management and disagreements. What do you normally use water for?
Translator:	We have water .... We use water for Bathing, cooking, drinking, washing, for animals drinking and building and plastering.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So how has the brave helped you to manage your water better?
Translator:	They've helped us by giving .... By building our capacity on managing or harvesting water and keep it safe for our human consumption.
Shani Haruna:	What about the water on your farm? How has the project helped you to manage water on your farms?
Translator:	They've educated us on bonding and tie ridging on the farms for moisture conservation and ploughing across the this thing .... The slope.
Shani Haruna:	And, would you say water usage results in disagreements or causes disagreements?
Translator:	Yes, there is disagreement. And let's say you go to fetch water and someone ... You get there first and another person comes and say I'm to fetch before you and you say she won't fetch. You say, I'm the first person, she will say, I'm the first person. And second disagreement is, the owner of the well will say don't put this rope in the water. Someone will just come out from the house with the rope that the owner is not allowing to put there and kept it there. There will be disagreement.
Shani Haruna:	And how has the brave helped you to resolve or improve the disagreements you just mentioned?
Translator:	You will go and talk gently to them to arrange themselves by putting the first person on .... Their barrels in line for the fetching of the water. If it is done that they will not be disagreement again.
Shani Haruna:	So how has the brave helped him in managing such situations?
Translator:	Brave have helped by training, by giving an experience to me on patience .... On having patience to things like disagreement problems .... For solving disagreement problems.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And in your opinion, what do you think needs to happen to improve water access and management?
Translator:	Okay. how we will do in future for improvement of the water is we should have trees along the river .... Along the river bank. So that it will be .... The water will not go far because of the shade of the trees.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And finally, how has the brave helped to improve your income and assets?
Translator:	Brave have built our capacity on early harvesting and when to harvest and have good yield so that you will have .... And how to store it for good marketing. So, we have the capacity on whatever we are doing with our farm product. So because of the capacity building we have, we have improvement in our income.
Shani Haruna:	So we'll like to say thank you for your time and the experiences that you have shared with us.
Translator:	Also thanks for your interview.



 
 
 
Shani Haruna:	This interview is with 402, annon number 009.
Translator:	I'm Sahadatu Mahama, a translator from 402 to Mr. Shani.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So we would like you to state your full name.
Translator:	Her name is 402.
Shani Haruna:	And what is your date of birth?
Translator:	40 years
Speaker 1:	Are you male or female?
Translator:	Female.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And do you hold any community positions?
Translator:	She's a community volunteer. A vice chairperson for health Borehole. 402 is the vice chairperson for community borehole committee. Health Borehole committee.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So we would like to .... We would like her to explain what her understanding of the brave project is.
Translator:	It is a man farming and it gives us experience and farming in the community.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So what do you know about that brave project?
Translator:	Farming. I know farming in the group. I know I havesting of water in the group. And what ... That's what I've learned ... I know.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And what did you learn under the brave project.
Translator:	I learned a lot from brave project. I learned weeding, when to weed and when to plough, and when to sow our seeds ... Crops. So we have the time we will plough, the time we will sow and the time we will weed the farm. That's what I learned from brave.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And what did you learn about water under the project?
Translator:	I let learn a lot from rain .... Harvesting of water and storage. I learned that you will harvest the water, have containers and put the water in and store it for some time to be used. So I learnt a lot from water harvesting ... Rainwater harvesting.
Shani Haruna:	And how did you find out about ... How did you find out information about the weather last season?
Translator:	I heard it from brave project.
Shani Haruna:	Apart from the brave project, which other source did you get the information?
Translator:	From raingauge recorders ... The community monitors. I've heard it from them in the groups.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. what about this season, how did they find out information about the weather?
Translator:	I heard it from brave project by Gmet people.
Shani Haruna:	How did they get the information to you?
Translator:	Brave project .... Madam Gladys brought gmet man to come and give the information to the group.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And when you heard the information, what did you do with the information in your farming activities?
Translator:	I used the information by making bonding in my farm and planting Legumes in our maize farm for the maize to have ... For the wet to be there ... Moisture to be there for the crops. That's what I know.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And in terms of the time that you sow, what changes did you make to the time that you sow your crops?
Translator:	I sowed early and later on I realized that the rain is to be above rainfall. So I went in and plant improved variety, which are early matured variety, so for that changes too I had good yield for that.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Then what about your fertilizer application? What changes did you make during your fertilizer application?
Translator:	I've changed my fertilizer application by drilling holes before applying the fertilizer and by applying the fertilizer in two weeks time. Like previous, I was just able to ...., I was just eager .... When I had the this thing I didn't mind when to apply, but whenever I had the fertilizer, that is the time I will apply. But now I know the time that I will apply the fertilizer and the way I will use the strategy I will use in applying the fertilizer for good yield.
Shani Haruna:	So why don't you spread the fertilizer again but now you drill hole under the plant and put the fertilizer in it?
Translator:	Because .... The reason why I drill holes before I apply is that if I didn't do that and I just applied it, it will wash by rain or the air will blow the this thing .... The power of the fertilizer and it will not work for the crop. That's why.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And what did ... What changes did you do to your harvesting?
Translator:	I have changed my harvesting by monitoring my maize whenever I saw the maize coming ... The leaves coming dry. I monitor it. If I see one one wet maize, I'll harvest it for good yield. And if it is groundnuts ... She didn't get to groundnuts. She just talked about the maize.
Shani Haruna:	So, what about the groundnuts?
Translator:	For the groundnuts, you have to monitor the groundnuts. Each time you monitor, you plug one and see whether the husk is black or still white. If it is black, you then harvest and you put it ... You capside the grounduts up for the sand to be removed, not to .... So that it won't regerminate when you harvest it and if you do that you just made sure that you go early with your partners and your group and go and harvest it.
Shani Haruna:	So in the future, what will be the best way for you to receive the weather information?
Translator:	I would like to hear from radio discussions .... Radio stations. It can have a information center in our community.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So do you think men listen to the radio more than women?
Translator:	Both men and women are listening to radio stations because they usually open the this thing .... The wireless set in the morning and evening. And morning and evening, women are still in the houses and they also listen to radio discussions.
Shani Haruna:	And who owns the radio sets that they listen to? Is it the man or the woman?
Translator:	Men have and few women have. Even as I'm sitting, I have one because brave gave me a radio set for listening.
Shani Haruna:	Do you think men have more phones than women?
Translator:	Men have phones than women because the youth boys .... All of the youth boys have phones and as for women somebody will like to have a phone, but due to poverty she won't get and she can't have a phone. So men have phones than womens.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	What kind of information do agric officers ... Agric extension officers give about water management?
Translator:	They give us information on harvesting water and storage .... Storing of water and for our household use and they .... We use that water for our important things like building, plastering, flooring of the this thing .... And so on.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And what kind of information do they give you about the weather?
Translator:	They gave us information on normal rainfall and above rainfall. A year, if it is 2018, we have normal rainfall they tell us. If it is 2019, we have above rainfall or low rainfall they will ... Below rainfall they will tell us. That information that they have been given to us.
Shani Haruna:	And what do they advise you to do with that information?
Translator:	Advice on sowing improved variety like early variety. We should plant early variety because if we have above rainfall and you didn't sow early variety and you sow the long variety ... The water ... Like water will come and ... Like if you sow a long the this thing .... The stream water may come up to that place and take your this thing. So we shouldn't plant along streams when it's above rainfall year.
Shani Haruna:	So what crops do you normally plant or cultivate?
Translator:	We used to plant ... To sow maize, groundnuts and soyabeans.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So how did you find information about the crops this season and last season? How did she find out information about the crops last season and this season?
Translator:	I heard the information in brave project meeting by agric extention ... Agric officer.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	What information did you hear about the crops?
Translator:	I had an information on to plant .... On shifting this thing .... Sifting cultivation. If you plant this groundnuts in this plot this year, next year you should plant maize, if you plant soyabean next year you should plant maize.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So what changes did you make to your farming activities as a result of the information you've been hearing on the radio or your heard on the radio?
Translator:	Changes have made because previously I've not been doing the shifting cultivation, but now I used to do shifting cultivation in my farm. So I've changed my this thing .... Crop planting.
Shani Haruna:	Did you make any changes to the varieties that you crop?
Translator:	I've been sowing four months soyabean, but now I've changed my variety on planting .... Sowing soyabean ... Three months soyabean which is a Janguma, which is called Janguma.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. what about the maize?
Translator:	Change maize too. I was planting the maize that I have since long, long time, which is four months variety, but now I have changed to wandata, which is three months.
Shani Haruna:	What about livestock? What changes have you made in your livestock rearing?
Translator:	I have changed my livestock rearing on guiding them inside the house. I don't leave them openly like that. And I used to convey their manure for farm use. So I have changed on that. I've changed my livestock rearing on ..... Like feeding like this I have left over food, which I've been driving for them, ... The bambara beans leaves, their husks and the beans husks, beans leaves. And I use .... For their health I called a veterinary officer to come and look at them.
Shani Haruna:	Yeah. Okay. So how did you find the well monitoring training that you received?
Translator:	No, I didn't, I didn't receive any training on the well monitoring.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Then do you think men and women have access to different information?
Translator:	No, they don't have different information.
Shani Haruna:	Why don't they have different information?
Translator:	Because of the gender issues, men and women have the same information. Because for the previous time the men, if the men are having discussion they sacked women away. But now the involve women in their decision making. So men and women have the same information.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So do you think men ge more information about water than women?
Translator:	Women have water information than men because women fetch water to the house for usage. Men doesn't have any information about .... Water information unless the woman tells the man.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And does that affect the relationship between men and women?
Translator:	No, it doesn't affect their relationship.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So, we're now coming to talk about water use management and the disagreements. So what do you normally use Water for?.
Translator:	There are so many usage of water. We use it plastering our houses, building our houses, Flooring our houses, drinking, Bathing, cooking, washing and livestock rearing .... Our livestock drinking.
Shani Haruna:	So, how are you able to manage such that you're able to use water for all the activities that you mentioned?
Translator:	We use frytol cans for .... The big cans for water storage, and we bought drums for storage of water. That is the things that we use because we don't have big cans to store water. But that one we use it for small this thing so that it will help to do something before.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And how has the brave project helped you to manage your water better?
Translator:	They've helped us by building our capacity on management. Water management by harvesting the water and storage of the water. That is how they help .... Brave people or brave project help.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. What other means or what other ways did the project help you to be able to manage water better?
Translator:	They helped me in making bonding on our farms and ploughing .... Cross ploughing on sloping places.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. then in your opinion, what needs to happen to improve water access here?
Translator:	If we would have a big tanks for the water storage, we'll have .... But we don't have money. We have been seeing it in the cities, but we don't have it in our community. If we would have had t, we would have preferred using that one to harvest the water for our usage.
Shani Haruna:	So apart from the what harvesting, what other thing needs to happen to improve water access?
Translator:	We'll make ... We'll monitor our boreholes well for not broken down the boreholes and we will dig a hand-dug Wells or Wells for the community so that we'll have enough water.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And finally, how has the brave project helped to increase your income?
Translator:	We learned from brave that we should do shifting cultivation. Through shifting cultivation we will have improved income. And we know there weather forecast too. We learned about the weather forecast. Through the weather forecast, we have enough income for our this thing. So we have .... Through this brave project, we now have good yield and good this thing .... Livestock, so that if you have a problem to solve and you want money, you have market for your this thing .... Goods and solve the problem. And it is through brave project that we can manage our income or resources.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So we'd like to thank you for your time and then the experiences that you have shared with us.
Speaker 2:	Thanks you for interviewing me.

 
 
 
Shani Haruna:	This interview is with 403, annon number 005.
Translator:	I'm sahadatu mahama, the translator from 403 to Mr Shani.
Shani Haruna:	So well like you to state your full name and your date of birth or your age.
Translator:	403. She's 403. She's 28 years old. She is woman, female.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. do you hold any community position?
Translator:	No, she is .... She's not.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So, we would like you to explain what your understanding of the Brave project is.
Translator:	My understanding of farmer and water project is, we ... First we didn't know that .... The time we will weed our crops, but through this farmer and water project, we now know the period that we have to weed our crops.
Shani Haruna:	And what are other thing did you learn again under the under the brave project?
Translator:	I've learned on water .... Rainwater for .... Like harvesting rainwater and for the harvesting we have to use the first dirty water for plastering and bathing before we harvest the clean water and store.
Shani Haruna:	And what did you learn about groundwater? The water that comes into your boreholes and Wells and you fetch.
Translator:	We have sections in this Jawani. So our section, we don't have boreholes. Our boreholes are broken down. We used to fetch stream water, and stream water too is dirty water so we used to fetch and wash our things clean and put it inside.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So we're now going to talk about weather information and use. How did you find out information about the weather last season?
Translator:	I've had the information from radio station.
Shani Haruna:	Which radio station?
Translator:	Ura radio.
Shani Haruna:	And what did you hear about the weather? What did they say about the weather?
Translator:	I've heard that it will be normal rainfall. The rainfall will be normal, that's what they said.
Shani Haruna:	So the radio set that you listen to, is it ... Who owns it? Is it you or your husband?
Translator:	From which radio that brave project gave me. I'm hearing from that radio set.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And who uses it most? Is it you or your husband?
Translator:	I use it more than my husband.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And do you also get weather information from agric officers?
Translator:	Yes, I've ever heard information from MoFA. And it is in Jawani farmers ... Farmers water project group. I've heard it. The agric officers came as part of the brave project to give them information.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	How did he .... How did she find out information about the weather this season? The one that just ended.
Translator:	For the 2019 I've heard it from farmers water project in Jawani and in radio stations at ura radio.
Shani Haruna:	So apart from the farmers and water group and the ura radio, which other source did you hear about the weather from?
Translator:	No, only brief project and ura radio that I have bee hearing it.
Shani Haruna:	So in the future, what will be the best way for you to receive weather information?
Translator:	I would like to be hearing it from radio stations in future.
Shani Haruna:	Which radio stations?
Translator:	Radios ... I like to hear from radios like ura radio, Tizaa radio, Nobel radio, Eagle FM, Savannah tamale. Savannah radio.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. do you think men have more phones than women?
Translator:	Man ... Women have more phones than men because women have phones for their ... For musics and heart cooling because sometimes you have heart .... Is it heart broken or what? You use the phone to make your heart come down and you can make calls. Like if you have a problem and you want to consult your someone from somewhere, you just use that one to call and tell that person your problem.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Then the weather informations that she heard, what did she use it to do in her farming activities?
Translator:	I've used it by changing my farm land position because I was in a valley place or slope place. When it was said that there will be heavy rain, My husband collected that place for cultivation rice and give me another place for my cultivation this year. For slopy place you plough across the slope, the slope. But the this thing .... If you want to do bonding in your this thing, you put fertilizer bags .... You take fertilizer bags and full down with sand and put it for bonding.
Shani Haruna:	The land that she changed, what was she growing on it?
Translator:	The cultivation maize and millet. But because of the soil erosion, we made bonding and tie ridging at that place. But when I heard that this year it will be heavy.... There'll be heavy rainfall my husband changed the farm land and cultivate rice and change another land for me to cultivate my maize and Millet.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	So, why didn't you sow rice in that Valley but rather moved to different place to sow maize and millet?
Translator:	It was my husband's land that he gave to me. So because of .... Because it is valley and there was heavy rain this year, he decided to change land for me and take it for the rice cultivation.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	And what information do agric extention officers give her about water management when they visit?
Translator:	They ... I've learned .... The MoFA people .... I had an information from Mofa people on bonding and tie ridging on my farm for moisture conservation.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	And what information do they provide about weather?
Translator:	Can't remember what they've said again.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. what crops does she grow?
Translator:	I cultivate groundnuts, soyabean and Millet.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Where did she find out information about the crops that she mentioned last season and this season, the one that just ended?
Translator:	Yeah, I heard it from farmer and water project.
Shani Haruna:	Apart from the .... So apart from the farmer and water group, where else did she get information about her crops?
Translator:	From radio station. Eagle FM.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So the informations she has been hearing from the farmer and water group on the radio, what changes has she made to her farming ... Her farming activities?
Translator:	Because of this farmer and water project I've changed my ploughing, weeding, applying ... Application fertilizer application and now I'm able to get good yield in my farm. Unless, the previous farming, for the ploughing, I was using bullocks and Hands for the ploughing. But this ... Through this project I used to use a tractor service. For the weeding we use .... I used to just sow my this thing. If I ploughed and sowed I will go and relax. Unless I feel like going to the farm, I'll go and just do whatever I want to do. But now through this farmer and water project, I used to weed my crops on two weeks time. First for the application of the fertilizer, I used to apply the fertilizer when the maize getting ready to reap. But now within .... Through farmer and water project I used to apply the fertilizer at two weeks time and it is not just I'll just fetch and be putting, I'll drill under the crop before I put the fertilizer in.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Translator:	For the application of the fertilizer, the reason why I'm drilling before applying it, if you just put it like that, maybe by the end .... By the time you finish there will be rain, rain and it will wash it away. That's why we are drilling and putting it.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Translator:	I'm now monitoring .... Through farmer and water project, I'm now monitoring my this thing .... My groundnuts to see whether it is ready for harvesting. If I'm ... But previous, I was .... I would just sow it and go and lie down. Unless it start re-germination I won't go there to plug them because I will say that they have not yet ready. But now I'll monitor and pick it and see whether the husk is black or white. If it is black, they're okay for harvesting. For the maize too, I'm not monitoring them to see when I'll harvest it. Previous I was just .... I would just get sit down and see if I'm see that I came and see that the this thing .... Termites are ..... And that this thing .... I would start picking them and harvest. But now if I'm monitoring them. The time I'll just see one one having green leaves ... Green husk, that is the time that I will harvest it.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And how did you find the well monitoring training that you received?
Translator:	No, I didn't have training on ... About well monitoring.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And, do you think men and women have access to different information?
Translator:	Both men and women are the same infor .... Hearing the same information.
Shani Haruna:	Why do they .... Why do both men and women hear the same information or have same information?
Translator:	The have unity. Because of unity that's why they have the same information.
Shani Haruna:	And do men get more information about water than women?
Translator:	Women have more water information than men. Women have more info.... Water information than men.
Shani Haruna:	Why? Why do they have more information than men?
Translator:	It is women who fetch water. The men ... Because the men didn't have .... The reason why the men didn't have the information of water is that men .... Women are fetching water and men just .... They are just sitting down waiting for the woman to fetch water for them to bath or cook for them to eat. That is why they don't have the information of water.
Shani Haruna:	And does that affect the relation between men and women?
Translator:	No, it will not affect the relationship.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	So what do you normally use water for? What activities do you use water for?
Translator:	We use water for parboiling rice, drinking, bathing, washing, cooking, building, plastering and flooring.
Shani Haruna:	And how do you manage your water such that you are able to use it for all the activities that you have mentioned?
Translator:	For you ... You go and fetch the water, clean water, wash your pots, jerrycans and any container that you have or pot that you have, you clean it well and go and fetch water, put the lid on and put it safely for your house use.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And how has the brave project helped you to manage water better?
Translator:	You have it when the rain is falling. So you put it in your basin or jerrycan or pot then put it down. It is just you .... The built our capacity on harvesting water. We now cover our water ... Rainwater for our house use. Through farmer and water project discussion, they've built our capacity on harvesting water and keep it clean for usage. But unless previous time we used to just harvest the water and just put it down openly. We won't cover it. We just use it. But now we know that if you harvest water you have to put something .... Bring something and cover the water for the use of your house activities.
Shani Haruna:	And would you say that water usage .... It causes disagreements? The use of the boreholes and the wells, does it result in disagreements?
Translator:	Yes, it has an disagreement. Because if it is stream water you just go and fetch and turn. Nobody is there for you to have disagreement there. And if it is in the well, you have your container for fetching, you just come and fetch and go away. You will not have disagreement there. But if it is borehole, you get there and be there. Someone will come, later on the person will say, I'm the first person to fetch before you. And you too, you won't agree. There that the disagreement will come.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So how has the brave project helped you to improve these disagreements?
Translator:	Farmer and water projects have helped for dissolving disagreement because they've learned ... They've teach us on how to harvest water and if you have many containers to harvest the water, you won't go for water at the river or the well or the borehole to fetch water so that there will be disagreement. You harvest water in your containers, someone would harvest .... You wouldn't go there for disagreement.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And in your opinion, what do you think needs to happen to improve water access and management?
Translator:	In future, If we have have pipes in our houses and where we will get it is if we had community contribution, we will look for an NGO for drilling of the pipes for us in our community so that we'll get water
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Then finally, how has the brave helped to improve to increase your income?
Translator:	Through farmer and water project, we now have good care for our ruminants, which will improve our income. And for the maize .... Our farm products like maize, groundnuts, soyabean, rice. Farmer and water project have led us .... Made this thing .... Have good yield for good grains for sale. If anytime you wants to sell your product, you just sell and be laughing because they are good. They will just see it and come and buy without calling themselves, so you improve your income.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So we'll like to thank you for your time and knowledge and experiences that you have shared with us.
Translator:	I've also thanked for your experience and knowledge that you .... And capacity that brave have impact in us for us to be interviewed. God help you.

 
 
 
Shani Haruna:	This is interview with 404, anon number 001.
Translator:	I'm Sahada Mahama. I'm the translator from 404 to Mr. Shani.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So we would like her to state her full name.
Translator:	Her name is 404.
Shani Haruna:	And what's her date of birth?
Translator:	She's sixty eighth years.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And does she hold any community positions?
Translator:	She's the section women's leader.
Shani Haruna:	And what does she do?
Translator:	She's a section women's leader who organize meetings for the women's and if anything is going to do like occasions like this, she's sharing their ... She gave the information to the women.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So now, we would like her to explain what her understanding of the brave project is.
Translator:	What I know about the brave project is on ploughing .... On farming activities like ploughing, weeding, sowing and fertilizer application.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And what did you learn about water under the brave project?
Translator:	I learned moisture conservation in the farm and harvesting of rainfall water for our home uses.
Shani Haruna:	And, what did you also learn about boreholes, wells and then your hand-dug wells?
Translator:	I learned about the hand-dug Wells and boreholes on .... Previous, we are thirsty, water .... We don't have enough water, but since we have knowledge on digging wells and hand-dug wells, we now have water for our activities.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So we're now coming to talk about access to weather information and its use. So the first thing we would like to know is, how did she find out information about the weather last season?
Translator:	I had the formation from brave project, MoFA office and radio stations.
Shani Haruna:	Which radio stations?
Translator:	The radio stations .... Ura radio, tizaa radio and Eagle FM.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And apart from the brave project, the radio stations, who else did she ask for information about the weather?
Translator:	I had the information from vsla groups, at vsla groups, from community monitors who are taking the rain gauge this thing .... Data.
Shani Haruna:	She mentioned she listens to radio to get the information. Who owns the wireless set that she listens to? Is it her husband or herself?
Translator:	I myself have a radio set because brave project gave me a radio set. So I'm Listening from my radio set.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And then men and women, who does she think listen to radio more than the other?
Translator:	Women are listening radio discussions than men.
Shani Haruna:	Why do women listen to radio discussions more than men?
Translator:	Women have time for the radio information, but men are busy. They don't have time to listen for radio discussions.
Shani Haruna:	And why do women have more time to listen to the radio discussions than men?
Translator:	Women work .... Women work in the house anytime at all. But men are not sitting in the house, they used to go out, they don't stay in the house regularly.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So she also mentioned agric officers. How does she get access to the agric officers for weather information?
Translator:	They used to come to our meetings .... Our group meetings. They come to meetings and spread the information for us to hear. That's why I heard from them.
Shani Haruna:	What kind of meetings do they come to?
Translator:	They come to the farmer and water meetings. That's where I used to hear the information.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So apart from the farmer and water group meetings are ther other groups in Jawani where she can have access to weather information?
Translator:	Yes, there is. There is a VSLA group that we meet and I hear the weather information from the facilitator there.
Shani Haruna:	So what we've been discussing is how she got access to weather information the previous season. Now how did she get information about the weather this season? The one that just ended .... The season that just ended.
Translator:	For the 2019 season, I heard the weather information from farmer and water group and VSLA groups.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So besides those .... The farmer and water group and then the VSLA group, did she hear the information from any other source?
Translator:	No, I didn't.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. then when she heard the weather information, what did she use that information to do?
Translator:	I used it to farm.
Shani Haruna:	How did you use that information in your farming activities?
Translator:	Use that .... I used that information to cultivate wandata maize .... Maize which is wandata, which is an improved variety.
Shani Haruna:	And what is it about that maize variety that made you to use that variety?
Translator:	I used it because our previous seeds are not .... Are longtime variety and maybe it will not be ready when the rain stop and you won't get good yield.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Translator:	PreviouslyI was weeding my this thing .... My farm whenever, I feel like going there. I will sow and go away. But since we have farmer and the water group, I learned that I should weed within two weeks time and interval .... Four weeks interval I should weed it so that it will be ... I will have good crops in my farm.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Sowhat other changes did you do in your livestock rearing because of you hearing information about the weather?
Translator:	I have a changes on ruminants rearing. I use .... Previously we used to tie them and raining season we used to tie them outside. They will be beaten by rain every time. But now through farmer and water group discussion, I realized that we have to have a husbandry for the ruminants and every time you clean their husbandry to be neat for their healthy.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	So besides the animal houses that she spoke about, what other changes did she make in her livestock rearing?
Translator:	I used to convey their manure to my ... And apply in my farm. Previously I was just rearing them and no treatment, but now I used to call veterinary officer to come and immunize them or give them drugs.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. In the future, what would be the best way for her to receive weather information?
Translator:	I will listen .... I will get the information from farmer and water group, vsla groups and whenever they are not there I will keep it in my mind and reminding myself on weather this thing .... Focus.
Shani Haruna:	The men and women here, who does she think has or have more phones than the other?
Translator:	Both men and women are having phones equal, even children to have phones.
Shani Haruna:	And why are they both having it equally?
Translator:	They use the phones for far informationsu. They use to get informations.
Shani Haruna:	And what does she mean by far information?
Translator:	Far informations like weddings, funeral and outdoorings.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	Do agric extension officers provide information about water management when the visit her?
Translator:	Yes, they do.
Shani Haruna:	And what information do they tell her about water management?
Translator:	They told us to harvest water and if we are harvesting water, we should harvest the first rain water which we mean dirty water to keep an parboil by our shea nuts and plastering of our houses.
Shani Haruna:	What about water management on your farm, what information do they provide you on that?
Translator:	I had .... They inform me on bonding and tiding in my farm. So that if I do that in my farm, my crops will be .... Will grow well when the moisture is conserved in the farm.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So the bonding and then the tie ridging, how does she do it on her farm?
Translator:	Instead of me ploughing along the sloping, she will cross the this thing ... Ploughing along the slope, so that it will across the slope so that it will the keep the water and for the moisture in the farm.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Andhow does she get access to the agric extension officers?
Translator:	I meet them in farmer and water group discussions. They comes to that group and talk to ... On that issues.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. and if the brave project is not there, how will she get access to the agric officers?
Translator:	We'll go to agric office and ask for the information whenever we need it.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. so what crops do you grow?
Translator:	I used to do Soyabean, cowpea, Bambara beans and okro.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. how does she get information about the crops that she mentioned?
Translator:	Previous years, I used to buy my seed at the market or at the market side or what I sowed for the last years. But now 2019 I ... Through farmer and water group discussion I bought my seeds from agric office and input ... From input dealers at Nalerigu. I used .... I went and bought chemicals for the pest of my okro and where I heard about it is, I was talking about the pest in my okro and somebody told me that there is a chemical in stores for sale for that. So I went and heard the information from radio that there is a chemicals for sale at the market for pests in our crops. So I went and bought the chemical from the input dealers.
Shani Haruna:	So who told you about the .... Who is that somebody that you mentioned?
Translator:	It is from radio information. I heard it from the radio station.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So in the future, what would be the best way for her to receive such information?
Translator:	She would like to hear the information from agric office.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	That informations that she has been hearing on the radio, what changes in her farming activities has she made as a result of hearing the information on the radio? We would like her to give some specific examples of the changes that she made in her farming activities.
Translator:	I've made a change and through that information. I used to farm wide, large land, but because I was not weeding it the actual weeding, but now I reduced my farm land by planting ... Sowing and I am able to weed it at appropriate time to have good yield.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	Apart from the weeding, what other activity did she change?
Translator:	I've made change .... I've made changes in my harvesting of soya bean. Previous time I was not monitoring my soya bean unless it starts scattering all over. But now I used to monitor it. Immediately I get ... I see the leaves red I will monitor it and come and harvest it early for not hacking in the field again. So that improves my yield and when I harvest it early.
Shani Haruna:	What about livestock? What changes has she made?
Translator:	I was not feeding my animals, but now since farmer and water group have discussed .... Have built our capacity on feeding animals, I used to feed my animals early in the morning before the goes out. Unlike the previous, I'll get to one month and I don't .... I didn't know where my animals are.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Then how did she find the well monitoring training that she received?
Translator:	No, I didn't receive any training on well monitoring.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And, does she think that men and women have access to different information?
Translator:	Men and women have different information all together.
Shani Haruna:	And why do they have different informations?
Translator:	They have different .... Men and women have different information because the world is not stable again. Men .... The children are not staying with their family regularly to know what is going on. So everybody have their own opinion and reason for their family and the community too. So they have different information all over.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And do men get more information about water more than women?
Translator:	Women have more information .... Water information than men because women have .... Woman are using water for home activities than men. That's why.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And does that affect the relationships between men and women?
Translator:	The ... It will not affect the this thing .... Their relationship because women will bring the information from the river to the house for the men to solve it. In case some will go and contaminate the this thing ... The water and women will have the information before the men because they goes for water, to fetch water. They'll have the information and come and inform the men to go and find out where from the contamination. So there will not be any effect or affect in that relationship.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	Nowwe're coming to talk about water use, management and disagreements. Sowhat do you use water for?
Translator:	Use water for plastering our houses, building our houses, flooring our houses, washing our clothings, washing our basins, bathing, cooking and drinking.
Shani Haruna:	And how are you able to manage your water so that you are able to use it for all the activities that you have mentioned?
Translator:	We have ponds, which we use to manage them for our buildings. And for the drinking water you just go and ... You wash your drinking pot and go for water from the well and put, cover it well for safety water and we can that for bathing, washing things in our this thing .... That's how we manage our water.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	And how has the brave project helped you to manage water better?
Translator:	They built our capacity on harvesting water, rainfall water. That's what they help.
Shani Haruna:	And,what other,education did they give you on water time management?
Translator:	Farmer and water project help to do bonding for in our farms to manage water for our moisture conservation.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. The water sources that you have been mentioning, the boreholes and the wells and the dams do you have committees that are responsible for managing those water sources?
Translator:	Yes, they have. We have borehole committees, well committees, but the dam doesn't have committee.
Shani Haruna:	So how are the members selected?
Translator:	They were selected by the community and at a community meeting and because .... The reason why they've selected her and Safia is that she is the responsible of the .... Because her role in the community. She's responsible for the organization of the women. She is ... She have the skills, leadership skills in the community for the community development.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	And, would she say that water usage results in disagreements?
Translator:	There is because there'll not have so many people in the river and there will not be disagreement. Someone will say I am the first person and the other one would say I'm the first person and it will just end where they are, it will not get up to the leaders to solve it.
Shani Haruna:	How has the brave helped her to resolve such disagreements?
Translator:	Farmer and water group have helped me on consultation issues. If that disagreement take place, I have to consult my members on how to solve it so that we will come together and solve it.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Then in her opinion, what needs to happen to improve water access and management?
Translator:	We'll tell farmer and water project to help us drill water boreholes or wells. And I will tell community assemblyman and to be send to district assembly for help to drill and boreholes.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	So how has the .... How has the brave project helped to improve her income and assets?
Translator:	Farmer and water group project have helped me in farming activities to improve my income. Example like farming activities like how to plough, when to apply fertilizer, when to weed, when to apply fertilizer and how to manage .... To handle my ruminants to have healthy life.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. We will to thank you for your time and experience that you have shared with us this morning.
Translator:	I have also thnked you. God help you for having time to come to this community and record and interview me this morning.

 
 
 
Shani Haruna:	This interview is with Mahammudu Bugri, Anon number 002.
Translator:	I'm Sahadatu Mahama, I'm the translator from 405 to Mr. Shani.
Shani Haruna:	Okay, so we'll like you to state your full name and your date of birth?
Translator:	My name is 405 and I'm 39 years old.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And are you male or female?
Translator:	Male.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And, do you hold any community position?
Translator:	Yes, I have they are about two.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. What are they?
Translator:	I have ... I am NDC delegates chairperson and I am unit committee memberand section leader, which is Zisung raana and yapaala.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So now we'll like him .... We would like you to explain what your understanding of the brave project is?
Translator:	I know .... My understanding of the project is, it have benefits on my .... It have benefits in farming activities like ploughing side, weeding side, fertilizer applications side and rearing of ruminants site.
Shani Haruna:	And what did you learn about water?
Translator:	I've learned about water, which is ploughing across the slopes in my farm.
Shani Haruna:	And what did you learn about boreholes and wells and then hand-dug wells?
Translator:	I didn't ... I don't have knowledge about water this thing .... The training of water management .... You say water. No, I didn't learn anything about wells and boreholes.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So, we're now coming to talk about access to weather information and then use. So how did you find out information about the weather last season?
Translator:	I've been hearing weather information from community people. They'll just say .... I'll just hear someone saying that the radio says .... I heard from the radio saying .... That they are saying that today it will be raining, and the rain will not enough for us ..... Will not be enough for us. That's what I was hearing.
Shani Haruna:	And apart from the people and the radio, where else did you hear weather information from?
Translator:	Only that. I have not ... I didn't hear anything anywhere again, but 2019 ....
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So you mentioned about hearing the information on radio, the wireless set to that you used to listen, who owns the wireless set and who uses? Is it the man or the woman?
Translator:	For the 2018 he was hearing from people who heard it from radio, but he himself didn't hear it from the radio station.
Shani Haruna:	So apart from the people that he heard it from, which other source did he get the weather information?
Translator:	No, I didn't hear from any station again, apart from the people who heard from the radio stations.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Then how did you find out information about the weather last season, the season that just ended 2019?
Speaker 2:	In 2019 I heard it from farmer and water project in which gmet people came, who is Mr Nana Kofi who came and said it in our group. That's where I heard it.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. what did you hear about the weather in 2019?
Translator:	I heard that there will be above rainfall with Lightining and thunder. That is what I heard from him.
Shani Haruna:	And, did the information meet what you were expecting?
Translator:	Yes. It meets what I was expecting.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And when you heard the information about the weather, how did you use that information?
Translator:	Yes, I used it by using my farm land, which has been .... If there is below rainfall it will not get water .... That place water will not be there. But if there will be above rainfall, there will be water there. So I've used it to cultivate maize .... Early matured maize and rice at the same time. So I've had the maize after the water comes and I've had the rice too. That's what I used it, the information.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. when did you plant the maize?
Translator:	I sowed the maize on May 25th of 2019.
Shani Haruna:	And when did you harvest the maize?
Translator:	I harvested it on August 27th 2019.
Shani Haruna:	And when did you sow the rice and when did you harvest the rice?
Translator:	I sowed the rice on the 7th June, 2019 and harvest it in December. I did ... I can't remember the date in December.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Translator:	Because he had the information that the rain will be heavy this year, he sowed rice after harvesting the maize in August.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So what other changes did he make as a result of getting information ... The weather information?
Translator:	I've changed a lot because I've ... When I was having my farm land I used to be planting .... Sowing maize every year in one particular place because.... Since I've heard farmer and water group discussion, I used to do shifting cultivation this year. I've changed by using ... Crossing slope places. If I'm to plough I'll look at my slope. Where it's slope I'll cross the ploughing. I don't farm straight the this thing .... The sloping. I've changed in harvesting too. Previous time I used to harvest late, but since I've heard from farmer and water group discussion I've ... I'm now monitoring my crops and see when to .... And I now know when to harvest my things for good yield .... My crops for good yield. I've changed a lot by protecting my farm with Bush burn. I used to do farm belt in my farm to protect the fire entering in my farm.
Shani Haruna:	In the future, what do you think will be the best way for you to receive weather information?
Shani Haruna:	In future I would've prefer if brave project would've let gmet people have their office within our region or our district so that they would speak in radio stations. They would go in radio stations to give the information so that we will also hear the information from the radio stations.
Shani Haruna:	And apart from the radio station, which other source would you want to receive weather information from?
Translator:	If brave project is .... Will be still working I would have prefer hearing it from that place. But if not that I don't know where I can hear it again.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And do men have more phones than women in his opinion?
Translator:	Men have phones than women.
Shani Haruna:	Why do men have more phones than women?
Translator:	The reason why men have phones than women is men don't have enough with in the .... Work load is not on men in the house like women. Women have work load in the house, they cater for house activities, house consumption and everything like health in the house, children health in the house, women cater for that. But men are not. And if not the youth girls who have the phones too. And for the youth girls, they have boyfriends who come buy for them. That's why the youth girls have the phones. And the youth boys too, they use to good for kayayo and work for themselves. They have their own farms .... Farm land like acre, 2 acres in their father's farm. After working for the father, he will go there and work for himself. So he used to have money through that and he can buy the phone. That's why the youth too have phones. So youth plus the men have phones more than the women.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	And why .... So why are the women more responsible in the house than men?
Translator:	Women have responsible than men in the house because the men doesn't gives womans money for cooking. They don't give money for health responses unless the woman. And they are only give the woman land to farm for the what ... For whatever she wants. If the groundnuts or okro .... If she had it, she will use that one and cater for the house again. So that's why she can't use that one for the house responses and use it to buy phone again. If she buys phone it's useless. She can't even get credit to do what she wants to do.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Then how often do agric extension officers visit to give information about farming?
Translator:	Agric officers often come on March to give us agric informations on farming .... March.
Shani Haruna:	Do they .... Do the agric extension officers give you information about water management?
Translator:	Yes, they do. Sometimes they came ..... Sometime they came and asked of where we usually get our drinking water in the farms.
Shani Haruna:	And apart from the drinking water, what other information do they give about water management?
Translator:	We use to dig hand-dug wells in our farms and we manage it by using .... Protecting the fall of animals like cows. So we used to fence it for the safe of cows falling in and for .... To be clean for drinking in our farms.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And what information do the agric extension officers normally provide you about the weather?
Translator:	They ... I had the weather information from agric extension officers on improved seeds. They advice on improved .... For buying improved seeds for the season because there would be .... If there is low rainfall and you sowed long term variety it may not be fruit when the ..... It may not have yields when the rain stopped. But if you sowed the improve variety, early variety you may harvest it at the correct time when the rain stops.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Then how do you normally get access to the agric officers? The agric extension officers in the absence of the brave project.
Translator:	So far as farmer and water project have come with agric extension officers, we have relationship with each other. So if they are not more coming and I want the information in weather I can just go to mofa office and asked for the weather information.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And then what crops do you normally grow?
Translator:	I have .... I plant .... I sowed maize .... I cultivate maize, rice, groundnuts, soya beans, millet and cow pea.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And for last season and this season, where did you find information about the crops that you mentioned?
Translator:	I've been hearing the information about my varieties of seeds ....early varieties from farmer and water project discussion and from my group members. I have a group in which we discuss farming activities and that too. So we discuss it there and I've heard the new variety and some were having the early matured rice seeds there. So I used to send mine to them and change theirs to go and sow in my farm. That is where I had the information.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	And in the future, what do you think would be the best way for you to hear information about your ... The crops that you mentioned?
Translator:	In future I will have the information from MoFA Agric extension officers in their office. I can go there for the information, or I will contact them in my phone to see whether .... To seek for the information.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. The informations you have been hearing on the radio, what changes did you do in your livestock rearing with that information?
Translator:	I've changed by having husbandry for my small ruminants. Unlike previous, I was just ... They were just outside roaming. Whether I have them or not I'll look for them when I'm in need of them. But now I have their the husbandary for them in the house.
Shani Haruna:	Apart from the housing, what other changes have you made in your livestock rearing?
Translator:	In case of the health of the animal, I used to call veterinary officer to come and look at the animal for me for the health of it.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. then how do you make the animal houses?
Translator:	I'll put holes around the this thing .... The building, so that it will have ventilation in the room for the animals.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So how did you find the well monitoring training that you received?
Translator:	No, I was .... I didn't take part of the training.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And do you think men and women have access to different information?
Translator:	Both men and women have the same information.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And do men get more information about water than women?
Translator:	Women have more information .... Water information more than men because the women are using water more, they are fetching water more than the men and they used to be in water sources than men. If any information in water sources at all .... Both either well, at borehole, at the stream, women will have the information before the men. That's why women are having water information than men.
Shani Haruna:	And does that affect the relationship between men and women?
Speaker 2:	No, it won't affect the relationship.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. We're now about to talk about water use, management and disagreements? What do you normally use water for?
Speaker 2:	We use water for building, washing our face early in the morning, cooking, bathing, building, plastering, drinking and flooring of our houses.
Shani Haruna:	So for all the activities that you mentioned, how do you plan your water use such thatyou are able to get water to use for all the activities that you mentioned?
Translator:	I'll plan by selling my farm product, which I will use for a donkey cart to give me water to build my this thing. I'm planning to build a house and I want to know how to get water to manage and get water at that time. I know I can't carry water for the building, but if I plan and get money I will get water to do that.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And how has the brave helped you to manage your water better?
Translator:	They've .... Farmer and water project help us to .... On water harvesting. So we use ..... They built our capacity on water harvesting. So we harvest water in our things to help us manage in doing what our activities.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	Do you have a group or a committee that is responsible for managing your boreholes or wells and dams?
Translator:	Yes, there are committee for boreholes and wells but not the dam. The dam doesn't have committee. Those who just dig the boreholes, some of them are responsible for that ... The wells. Yes.
Shani Haruna:	So how are the members selected?
Translator:	It was ... They were selected by the community, the community members.
Shani Haruna:	And what did they consider the before selecting those people?
Translator:	Because their contribution to the activities in the community, active contribution. Because of the active contribution in the community that they've selected them.
Shani Haruna:	In your opinion, what needs to happen to improve water the access and management in Jawani?
Translator:	I think that if .... In future, if we have community .... We would have conduct community contribution for the repairing of the boreholes, it would have been better for us to have access for water in future.
Shani Haruna:	Would you say, water usage, that's the boreholes and the wells, their use results in disagreements?
Translator:	Yes, disagreement was there previously, but now our days so far as we have so many wells in the this thing .... You go there and you won't get someone to carry you self. But now .... The previous time they will be there about 20 ro 10 women to fetch the water. They will say, I am the first person. Someone would say I'm the first person. But now they won't be there up to five people self. So there's no the disagreement again.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And finally how do you think the brave project has helped you increase your income and assets?
Translator:	It has help me by building my capacity on farming activities. Like previous, I used to farm a lot, but I'll loss. But now that I've had the discussion on .... The education on farming, I've now have good yield in my farm with my farm products, which helps me to do whatever I want. So that is what it has help me.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	So we'll like to say thank you and grateful to you for your time and the experiences that you have shared with us.
Translator:	I've also have greetings to all, like brave projects people like mr Shani, CARE People like Madam Gladys, mofa like mr Foster and all members in this group. I have my greetings going to you people. I thanks a lot for Mr. Shani as he used his time to Interview me today.

 
 
 
Shani Haruna:	This is interview with 406 anon number 003. So 406  you are welcome to the interview.
406:	Thank you.
Shani Haruna:	Well like you to state your full name.
406:	My name is 406
Shani Haruna:	And what's your date of birth? How old are you?
Speaker 2:	My date of birth is 2nd January, 1973.
Shani Haruna:	And are you male or female?
406:	I'm female.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And, do you hold any community position here in Jawani?
406:	Yes, I'm a community health volunteer and community development volunteer.
Shani Haruna:	And that's nice. It's good to know. So now we would like you to explain what your understanding of the brave project is. In other words, what do you know about the brave project?
406:	Yes. brave project is about human livelihood and farming this thing .... It's about farming and water storage and livestock this thing ... About livestock rearing and farm activities.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So what did you learn about water?
406:	I learnt how to store water for our household and farm activities, using water in our farms. How to store and use it in our farms and our home activities.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So what did you learn about how to store water on your farms?
406:	I learned how to make .... I learned how to do bondings in our farms, to store this thing and how to plough our farms to maintain water in our farms and how to do conversational agric in our farms.
Shani Haruna:	And you also mentioned you learned something about livelihoods, what did you learn about livelihoods?
406:	Learn how to .... How to store our grains, to farm and get good grains and how to .... The storage of the grains and how to maintain our .... To manage our foods and animals.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	And you also mentioned that you learned something about water. What did you learn about groundwater? That's the water that comes into your boreholes and then the wells and you fetch for drinking or for other activities. What did you learn about the groundwater?
406:	I learned under .... I learned about digging the wells, hand-dug wells and boreholes for groundwater for household consumance.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Did you learn something about how to use the groundwater for farming activities?
406:	Yes. we have a small hand-dug well which we used to dig and use it for our dry season gardens.
Shani Haruna:	And where are those dug-outs located in the community?
Speaker 2:	We have our dug-out wells, some in the this thing ..... In by our houses and some like the one we use for the dry season gardens are in the river. We dug them in the river when it is dry season. We dug them in the river and fetch for our garden.
Shani Haruna:	So you mentioned dry season farming. How widespread is dry season farming here in Jawani? Are many people into the dry season farming?
406:	Yes. So far as we learn every day, every night, some people are going in for the dry season by .... Most of the community people are going in for dry season garden through this project.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Andwho would you say is going into the dry season farming more? Is it a men or a women?
406:	Youth and men. They are going for dry season and some women too are helping their children and their husbands to .... Some, but not all, few of women are helping their children and husbands.
Shani Haruna:	You said some help their children and their husbands to do the dry season farming. Why are they not doing the dry season themselves, but helping their children or their husbands?
406:	Okay. The women are engaged in so many things. Like by this time, the dry season in garden they're starting it but the men are still building ..... They are in building and by the time the men finish, the women have to plaster and floor and do the house flooring. So they don't have time, enough time to do their own gardens. That's why.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	So we're now coming to talk about access to weather information and how you use the weather information. So the first thing we would like to understand under the access to weather information is, how did you find out information about the weather last season?
406:	The last sseason weather was somehow better because we have enough rain and we have good yield, some. We have maize but the groundnuts was not good. But this 2019 we have so many yield on groundnuts and millet low yield. So that's the information I had for the this thing ..... 2018 and 2019 we have some .... Last 2018, we had so much millet but 2019 we have low millet, small millet. But 2018 we have .... We didn't get groundnuts but 2019 we had groundnuts.
Shani Haruna:	So, what do you think is the reason for you getting a low yields for millet last year as compared to the last two years and then a higher groundnuts yields this year, but low groundnuts yields last year. What is the reason behind that?
Speaker 2:	Okay. The reason was, last two years the this thing .... The rainfall was good. But the groundnuts I can't best tell what .... Is it that the rain was not enough for the groundnuts or is too much for the groundnuts. But this time .... This year the groundnuts was perfect because the rain was okay. But the millet was not good because the rain was too much for the maize. The maize was already fruiting when the rain was still coming that caused the low yield for the maize.
Shani Haruna:	And where did you hear information about the weather from?
406:	The weather, last two years I was hearing it in our meetings and radio station, but this year, this year too, this project .... Brave project. I was hearing it from brave project, radio stations and still our meetings. We have meetings in this community. So I was hearing it from gmet people at assembly. We used to have a participatory scenario planning meetings. So I was hearing it. Last two years I was hearing it in that participatory scenario planning meeting and 2019 I was hearing from brave project which is from Ghana gmet.
Shani Haruna:	You mentioned you have some groups here in Jawani where you get some weather information. We would like you to say a little bit more about those groups. What are the groups for? And what do they do?
406:	We have vsla groups, community development groups and health groups. So any groups at all ... So far as I'm among the this thing .... Community development, I used to be there so that I was hearing it from the community. Whoever hear it from radio station he'll come to that meeting and share it. VSLA groups, they will come to that place and share it. And I myself, I have been sharing it. If I hear it from Gmet people, I'll share it in that meetings.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	So in those meetings how do they get the weather information to you? Do they come there to inform you about the weather? Or how do they get the messages to you?
406:	They also hear .... They also get the information from radio stations. They normally hear the information from radio stations.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	So you mentioned you got information about the weather .... You mentioned you had information about the weather last season and this season. So now we would like to know, what did you use the information you got about the weather to do?
406:	Okay. The weather .... Last two years season I was not able to use that weather to do my this thing .... But this 2019 weather I've heard it, I used that weather to do my farming. So far as I heard that there will be rainfall .... Too much rainfall, normal rainfall and I decided to do the thins thing .... To convey water for storage for my activity because I was planning to build. So I was able to store water and whenever I go to the farm, if it is ... If I saw clouding, because of the thunder and the Lightining, I have to come home because my farm is not far from the house. And when I use that information to share it to my people or my community people to know about the weather, the 2019 weather this thing .....
Shani Haruna:	Okay. you mentioned you farmed groundnuts this year. So we would like to know, how did you use .... How did the weather information help you in your groundnut farming?
406:	It helps me a lot because I was .... I just farmed small .... I sowed small groundnuts but I had it enough because I sowed it last week of May. And that was what I heard, if I sowed that period I'll get the groundnuts, that's why I sowed it that .... But the last two years I sowed on April, so I couldn't get it.
Shani Haruna:	How about the maize? How did you ....?
406:	I sowed the maize on that May - June. And because of that, that I lost the maize because the rain was too much. It rains when it was ready for fruiting.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And did you have to maybe ..... Did you have to maybe change new varieties because you heard information about the weather?
406:	Yes, I changed. I used the this thing .... When I was to sow the maize, I went and bought wandata and I bought fertilizer and I bought soya bean from agric this thing .... People. From agric people that I bought that maize for my planting this year. I was using what I harvested in my farm. I was using that. But the millet I used what I planted last two years to plant. But when I bought that this thing .... The maize from the agric this thing .... I have my this thing my maize correct.
Shani Haruna:	So what did they tell you about the new varieties that made you to buy it and then stop using your old variety? So what did they tell you about the new varieties and rainfall that made you to buy and use them?
406:	They said that it an improved variety. If you have .... If you are able to use it, you will get good yield if you follow the instructions or the this thing to sow it and use fertilizer, it to yield well.
Shani Haruna:	Anddid they tell you something about the requirements of those varieties?
406:	Yes, but I can't recall it because we have 90 days with some amount of water this thing. They've told me, but I can't remember the water this thing. But the days, 90 days, 110 days variety, but I use the 90 days variety.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So now, the weather information that you mentioned you received, in the future what do you think is the best way for you to get such information?
406:	We have .... Maybe it will continue in the this thing .... Radid stations for us to be hearing or we will request gmet people because we can't just say that we will hear it from brave because brave will wind up. We'll look for gmet people or weather this thing .... Radio stations to hear information.
Shani Haruna:	So how would you look for them? How will you look for the gmet or the radio stations to get the information?
406:	We last had the gmet people number, the one who came here for brave .... Whom brave brought to us. We had the number, but still we'll look for a brave people like you Mr Shani to hear about the this thing .... The weather information. If we contact you people, you'll lead us to get this thing .... The information.
Shani Haruna:	And apart from us, where do you think, or how would you get in contact with the weather people to get the information?
406:	If not brave people, maybe you get the contact like this and you won't get the this thing. You collect the contact and you may lost your this thing .... Your phone. You wouldn't get the contact again to call the Gmet people. And if you didn't hear from radio station, you can't get the information.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So you mentioned that you listen to radio stations. The radio sets you listen to, who owns that radio set?
406:	We have so many radio stations. We have Eagle FM at Walewale, we have Tizaa radio at Nalerigu, we have Nobel radio at Nalerigu and we have URA radio at Bolga. So those radio stations that we can hear and Tamale, GBC, Zaa radio, Savanna radio, all the radio station which can reach to our end.
Shani Haruna:	What .... I was .... What you mentioned are the radio stations that you get. But we would like to know, the wireless set that you use to listen to the radio .... The wireless sets ..... Who are the owners of the wireless sets? Who owns them?
406:	The wireless sets ..... We the this thing .... The group .... We the group we have wireless sets which has been given by brave project. We are listened to .... We will use that to listen for the this thing and some men have their own radio sets in their houses, women too have radio sets. They will listen to that radio sets. We have youth too who have their own radio sets, they will use that ones to listen.
Shani Haruna:	Then men and women here, who do you think listen to radio more?
406:	Okay, the men .... Now a days, from 2018 to this time both men and women are listen to radio stations because we had so many informations that we have been hearing from radio stations, especially the radio stations which we have regular in our this thing .... In our community like Nobel radio. Any time men and women are eager to listen to that because of their jingles.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	Then, do you think men have more phones than women here in the community?
406:	Oh now, men .... Both youth and women have phones than men self.
Shani Haruna:	And why is that so?
406:	Most at times the women have the phones for their ... For this thing .... The music. They use it for music and the men .... The youth .... Some of the men have contacts like how I'm having my this thing .... I have it for informations .... To hear your formation. We have radio sets in that phones too. Some are using the phones for their radio .... Listening of their radio information.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. then how regular do extension officers visit you to give you information about your farming?
406:	Okay. Mostly .... We .... Sometimes ..... We didn't have extension agent in our communities for the past years. It is just because of the shortage of the extension officers. But this year they gave us extension officer for our area. So we think this year around we will have regular visits, but the previous years we they will just visit us once a while.
Shani Haruna:	So the new person that you mentioned has been given to you as the extension officer, has he already visited?
406:	Yes, he came here for about three times.
Shani Haruna:	And what information did he give to you about water management?
406:	Not yet. The information was just, he came to tell us the the thing ..... About the improve seeds for the season. And later on he asked for registration of cashew planting and registration for those who have cashew trees. That is the information that he has brought so far.
Shani Haruna:	And did he or she give you information about how the weather would go?
406:	Okay. Yes, because we have been given the information before he came, so he emphasized on it on weather information that we heard.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. You mentioned you farmed maize and groundnuts last season. How did you find out information about your maize and groundnut?
406:	My information from? I had the information on planting of the crops from agric extension people. I went for a meeting. So I came and tell and spread the information to the community about how to use the this thing that crops .... The improved variety and when to plough, when to sow and the time to apply fertilizer, and when to see .... When it is having an insects in it, how to know that your things are having insects and where to go. And the place that you go for the this thing .... For the solution is to go to the agric office and tell them. And this time they were given a this thing ..... Chemical to come and put for the this thing .... The insects or the this thing ... Or it was some caterpillars. So they will give you the this thing, but as for my farm I didn't realize the this thing .... The pests in my this thing. So I didn't go. But some, I went and visit because I was a VBA in that community. So I went and visit a farm and I saw the this thing. So I report to the agric people, and that person I told him to go to agric and collect the this thing for the farm.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	So, where did you attended the meeting where you had the information about the crops?
406:	I attend the meeting both Gambaga and Tamale. I went for a brave meeting at Tamala and I heard it. I went for a WAP meeting at Gambaga, I've heard it. So I brought that back to the community and share the information.
Shani Haruna:	You mentioned WAP. What is WAP?
406:	It is Womens in Agriculture platform.
Shani Haruna:	And what do they do?
406:	They do .... It's just like how brave people are doing .... Farming activities and planting for food and job .... This thing like fertilizer, improved seeds, they are just doing farming activity. They educate people on farming activities and they insist in woman farming.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	Then in the future, what do you think would be the best way for you to receive information about your farming activities?
406:	Like if we have .... We would have have a this thing .... Radio station in our this thing or communication center in our this thing ..... Information center in our community. And if not that we will just be hearing it from radio stations as I said.
Shani Haruna:	Then what changes did you make in your farming activities because you heard the information on the radio?
406:	I changed a lot because how I was farming, I reduced my farming land .... My farm land. For the year, I just farmed small and I was able to weed it, get fertilizer, apply it as it's supposed to be. And because of that I had enough food from that small portion. So I realized that if I hear the information I have to manage and I will be able to do it well and get good yield.
Shani Haruna:	And what changes did you make to your livestock rearing?
406:	My livestock rearing I used to convey this thing.... Beans.... I Used to store beans ... If they threshed beans, I'll conveyed that this thing for my livestock .... The feeding of my livestock. I used to feed them in the house. I didn't just leave them to be roaming or alone. In the evening I'll make sure that all of my this thing are in the house. That is what I changed. The feeding .... I change the feeding and the keeping them in the house. I don't leave them to be roaming about in the night, but in the afternoon I still let them roam.
Shani Haruna:	So we're now coming to discuss well monitoring training and then use. So how did you find the well monitoring training that you received?
406:	We used to .... We monitor it by keeping it clean, good sanitation and the water too we closed the well. It have a lid which we used to close it and we wash around, sweep around the wells and we fetch .... We use, we have a rope that we are using to fetch the water. We don't use any rope to tie the this thing and fetch.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. did they show you how to measure the water levels in your wells?
406:	No, they didn't show us unless the borehole that we .... The one .... The broken down one that we were measuring, but the well we didn't measure it the well, we don't measure it.
Shani Haruna:	The broken borehole that you mentioned you used to measure the .... The non-functioning borehole that you mentioned that you used to take the water leve measurements, what did you do with the measurements that you took?
406:	They used to come and collect it from Accra. The data, if you measure and record the data, they used to come and collect and go to Accra.
Shani Haruna:	And what did you do with it personally? The data that you recorded, what were you doing with it? Did you use it to do something on your own?
406:	No, I didn't.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. do you think men have different .... Have access to different information here, and then women too have access to different information?
406:	They don't access different information because any information at all they've heard, both men and women all are having it in the same views.
Shani Haruna:	And do you think that men get more information about water than women?
406:	No. Women get more information about water than men. If not dry season like this, like when they want water to build their houses, they don't have more information, or they went for fishing. But women have more access in water than men because they use the water frequently.
Shani Haruna:	So does that affect the relationship between men and women here?
406:	No, it doesn't affect because they know they use water when they need it in their work and women too use water when they need it. And if it is time for water ..... If dry season we don't get water, men will organize and come and get well .... Hand-Dug wells .... Small wells for them, but now we have our own wells in the this thing, so they don't have problem with that.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	So we're now coming to talk about water use, management and the disagreements. So what do you normally use water for?
406:	We use it for building, washing, cooking and drinking.
Shani Haruna:	And what do you think has helped you to plan your water use better?
406:	If you store ... The storage will let you use it better. If you store it well, if you make well .... Good storage, you can manage and having it enough. If you have enough water it will help manage water usage.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And how has the brave project helped you to manage water better?
406:	They built my capacity on storage of water and harvesting of water. That made .... The built my capacity. They built my capacity on storage and harvesting.
Shani Haruna:	Which other knowledge did you acquire that has helped you to manage water better either in the house or on your farm?
406:	The this thing .... Bonding. The boundaries in the farm. I have the knowledge on boundary in the farm, which will manage my water for my farming.
Shani Haruna:	Then you mentioned boreholes, wells and hand-dug wells. Do you have committees that are responsible for managing them?
406:	Okay. The wells, we have committee for that wells. And we have committee for boreholes which is functioning.
Shani Haruna:	How .... What do they do?
406:	They meets and get the problems of the boreholes. And they hold a meetings for that and they will contribute monies for borehole repairing or wells repairing because wells too they refloor it and they used to buy key or this thing for the wells.
Shani Haruna:	And how many people are in a committee?
406:	The well side, it is about four people. We have the chairperson, secretary, organizer and treasurer. But the borehole side we have nine. We have the chairman and the vice, we have sanitation and the vice and mechanic and the treasurer, the secretary.
Shani Haruna:	So before those people are chosen as members, how are they selected?
406:	They had a community meeting and select them. It was a community meeting. They conduct community meeting and they selected them. They select .... They nominate the chairperson and the this thing .... The secretaries and son on.
Shani Haruna:	And before you can be a member, what do they look out for in a person before he or she is selected as committee member?
406:	They will look at your this thing .... Your patience, truth, transparency, regular in meetings, and what .... Humble. That's what I can remember.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	Then, the use of the boreholes and then the wells, does it normally result in disagreements? The use of the boreholes, the wells and then the hand-dug .... The dug-outs that you mentioned do they normally result in disagreements?
406:	Yes, they result because some .... Someone will come early and some will come late and wants to fetch before the other, there will be a misunderstanding there. And through the contribution someone will contribute and some wouldn't contribute and that person will come for the water .... To fetc the water. If the committee member is there or any person who knows that that person didn't contribute it will result a this thing .... A problem. And some too ..... Some members too, some will bring two ..... It will come to some time that the water is not enough there. So, someone will come and bring two containers to fetch at the same time. The other person wouldn't agree. It will result ....
Shani Haruna:	And how are those the disagreements normally resolved?
406:	Okay. They will ... The committee will sit down and get a solution. They will call a meeting to solve it out.
Shani Haruna:	And how has the brave project helped in improving or reducing some of these disagreements?
406:	They .... Through the capacity building, they used to talk on how to be with a group or how to be a leader in a group or in a community. So through that, if you take that this thing .... You take that knowledge to solve the this thing .... The committee will take that knowledge to solve it.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	Then, in your opinion, what do you think needs to happen so that you can have more access to water here in Jawani?
406:	Okay. if brave people will have another ..... We have CRS people have this REST project, and they say REST1 REST2. So if Brave people would have be brave2 in our community we would have appeal to them to help us in getting that in our community.
Shani Haruna:	So apart from brave, which other sources or which other way do you think that you could have access to more water sources?
406:	We .... Like the this thing .... The wells that we have, there was a project, I forgot of that project. We .... I this thing .... Lobbied to that project. So we have to be lobbying to NGOs so that they will help bring that project to our community to help.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	Would you like to involve the local district assembly in water management?
406:	Yes. Even our boreholes, we used to go to them, they dug some for us. So we would like assembly to be part, we'll lobby in assembly.
Shani Haruna:	And how do you think the brave has helped you to increase your income?
406:	Oh, brave have helped a lot because we learned how to plan our farm activities. We learned so much from brave on farming, crops, variety of .... Seed varieties and so on, and how to do it. And if you get that knowledge and apply it in your farm, you have to get ... You'll get good yield. And if you get good yield, you get .... Your financial problem will solve because you sell some from your farm or your .... The rearing of .... We learned a lot on rearing of livestock. So if you get good livestock, you can sell some and solve your financial issues.
Shani Haruna:	So if you compare your ... Like how was your yields this year as compared to othe years?
406:	Okay. I've already said it. This year we have enough rain, but the millet, it has spoilt the millet. The rain has spoilt the millet. So we had enough .....
Shani Haruna:	Maize or millet?
406:	Hey, millet, millet. Did I say maize? The rain has spoilt the millet, but the groundnuts we had it correct. Only the millet it has spoilt. So we have so many .... This year too only the millet that we didn't get but last two years we had the millet too and we didn't get the groundnuts.
Shani Haruna:	So how many bags or basins did you get this year as compared to the other years?
406:	Last two years I ploughed three acres of groundnuts. So I had three bags out of the tree. But this year I ploughed three acres, I plant this thing .... I sowed groundnut .... Three varieties of groundnuts. I sowed sam nut, Nkatie SARI, and our local this thing .... Groundnuts. And I sowed maize, millet in that this thing and small soya bean ..... That same three acres. But I had our own groundnuts .... I had seven bags, I had the sam nuts four bags and I have the NKatie SARI one back, and I had two backs of maize. And the millet .... As for the millet I ploughed another ..... I just did converational agric. So I add them and the maize was two. Only the maize that I didn't get that this thing. Out of that three acres that I have seven bags of groundnuts, two bags of maize, four bags of sam nut, one bag of Nkatie SARI and small portion of soya bean.
Shani Haruna:	So we would like to thank you for your time and for you sharing your experiences with us. We're so happy speaking to you and grateful to you for your time.
406:	Thank you too.

 
 
 
Shani Haruna:	This interview is with 407 annon number 004.
Translator:	My name is Sahadatu Mahama. I am a translator to 407 .... From 407 to Mr Shani.
Shani Haruna:	We would like to know her full name.
Translator:	My name is 407.
Shani Haruna:	What is her date of birth?
Translator:	She says the five years.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Is she male or female?
Translator:	She's a female.
Shani Haruna:	Do you hold a community position?
Translator:	Yes, she is politician. She's the women's organiser ....
Shani Haruna:	What do you know about the brave project?
Translator:	They have come to teach knowledge that will benefit us. I know it to be farmer and water. I have learned .... This water, when it rained, we did'nt know you have to harvest and store the water so that you can have till the dry season.
Shani Haruna:	What else did you learn again?
Translator:	What I learned again in the farmer and water group is that we didn't know if you are farming on slopy land, you have to plough across the slope so that when it rains the water won't wash the crops away. We used plough along the slope. In the farmer and water group we learned that you plough across the slope so that water won't wash the soil away. When you finish ploughing across the slope, you go to the end of the farm land and make a big ridge across the slope so that when it rains the water will remain on the farm and not run away.
Shani Haruna:	What did you also learn about livestock rearing?
Translator:	I have learned a lot in livestock rearing. Because in the dry season we use to leave the livestock to roam, but since I joined the farmer and water groupd, after harvesting your cowpea, you harvest the stalks and come keep at home and feed to the animals during the dry season when the grasses are burnt.
Shani Haruna:	We're now coming to talk about access to weather information and what you use the information to do. So how did find out information about the weather last season?
Translator:	We had the weather information from the farmer and water group. They taught that if the rains will be so much .... There are some years the rains will come very high and other years it will rain not much. Last year the rain was normal. We heard it will rain a lot. We heard the information from the brave people and gmet, and mofa officers from Gambaga. We heard information from Gmet people and brave people and agric officers ... From agric offices.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So the agric officers how did they get the information to her?
Translator:	They came with brave people in Jawani.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So apart from the agric and then the brave, which other sources did she get weather information from?
Translator:	I've heard it from rain gauge recorders.
Shani Haruna:	So how .... For thisyear or this season, how did she find out information about the weather?
Translator:	That she heard from agric people, brave, gmet and rain gauge recorders.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So the weather information that she had ... The weather information that she had, what did she use that information to do in her farming activities?
Translator:	I've used it for my boundary. That's what ..... I have learned to plant legumes in my maize or millet.
Shani Haruna:	How did she .... How did the weather information help her to start sowing her ...The crops that she grows?
Translator:	The information helped me to plant improved variety and it helped me not to farm along the this thing ... Slope ... The stream. And changed my land for where I used to plant maize and there will be water in which it won't do I change it to sow rice. That is what it helped me, change the maize variety.
Shani Haruna:	So what about ... What the new variety are you now sowing?
Translator:	I've bought three months variety from the input dealers.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	What about the groundnuts?
Translator:	As for the groundnuts, I didn't plant, I didn't sow groundnuts. So I'm planning to sow this season coming because last year I don't have money to buy groundnuts. That's why I didn't sow groundnuts.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So the weather information that she mentioned she heard, in the future, what would be the best way for her to receive it?
Translator:	If brave people are still there, I will be hearing it from brave people and if they wind up they should try to let, let me hearing it in radio stations.
Shani Haruna:	So apart from the radio stations, which other means does she think that will the best for her to hear about the weather information?
Translator:	From radio, TV stations too is possible for me to be hearing.
Shani Haruna:	So apart from radio and then the TV which other means do you think that everybody here in Jawani will be able to hear information about the weather?
Translator:	Brave people can build ... Will build information center for the community to be hearing and the nearby communities.
Shani Haruna:	Men and women, who listen more to the radio here in Jawani ?
Translator:	Women listen more than men because men used to go to farm and leave their radio set and women too have their own radio sets. So they used to be in the house. So they normally operate when the husband is not there.
Shani Haruna:	So when the man is going to the farm don't the women go with them?
Translator:	Women too are going to farm but mostly men have work in the farm more than the women. And some woman doesn't go to farm because they have their sons' wives in the house. So they used to be in the house any time at all. That's why they listen more than the men.
Shani Haruna:	And men .... Do men have phones more than women here in Jawani?
Translator:	Almost both men and women have, especially the youth girls and boys. They have it equal.
Shani Haruna:	So how often do agric extension officers visit to give you information about your farming activities?
Translator:	Farming season, they used to come here farming season.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. How regular? Is it weekly, monthly or yearly?
Translator:	Two months interval.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So, what information do they provide you when they come?
Translator:	The information that bringing is weather information. They used to bring weather information, seeds ... Improves seeds and this time around planting for food and jobs for fertilizer,
Shani Haruna:	Then, what information do they normally give to her about water management?
Translator:	We should not let children play with our boreholes for them to spoil the boreholes and we should fetch water and have a lid for the pot or the drum that you kept the water in so that the water will be clean for your usage.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. and what advice do they give you about your water management on the farm?
Translator:	We shouldn't wash in water .... Stream waters. And we shouldn't do drink ponds water. If there's a pond in your this thing ... You shouldn't use it and stream water too, we shouldn't wash things inside the water.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So, the crops that you grow, where did you find information about them last season? Last season and then this season?
Translator:	We heard the information from brave with agric officers and the radio station.
Shani Haruna:	So in the absence of the brave project, do they have access to the agric extension officers?
Translator:	We will get the information from radio stations and agric .... Mofa office.
Shani Haruna:	So the MoFA office, how do you get access to them?
Translator:	We will get the information from our community extension officer.
Shani Haruna:	What changes did you make in your farming or livestock activities as a result of the information you heard on the radio?
Translator:	I've made a changes on fertilizer application because previously I used to just fetch and put it down. But now I use to drill under the plant before I put the fertilizer.
Shani Haruna:	So what other change did she make again in her crop production?
Translator:	I made a changes in my
Speaker 3:	Groundnuts. I used to plant groundnuts .... Sow groundnuts and if it is not regerminating, I wouldn't go there for harvesting. But now I'll monitor the groundnuts until I picked one and I removed one and see whether it is okay for harvesting and I'll dehusk and see the husk will be black and I will know that it is now ready for harvesting. It will not regerminate again.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. what about new varieties of maize or groundnut, what changes did you make in your ... In varieties that you plant?
Translator:	There is changes and the improved variety because we used to plant .... To sow late maize and we would be hungry when the maize are not yet ready for consuming. But now through brave project we have to .... We are planting the improved variety and by the time you will be hungry the things too are ready for consumption.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So how did you find the well monitoring training that you received?
Translator:	No, I'm not part of the well committee, so I don't have training. I didn't receive any training on that.
Shani Haruna:	And do you think men and women have access to different information?
Translator:	Previously, We have different informations, but now men and women, because of gender issues, men and women are having the same information equal.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Sowhat different like .... What different information did men receive in the past?
Translator:	Previously, men was having farming activities information and women doesn't have it, but now both men and women are all having the same information on farming activities. Previously, the men were not accompanying people to .... Their women to health facilities, but now health issues are both men and women activities which they are doing. If a woman is going for weighing most of the mens accompany their womens to .... For weighing and health activities that they ... If a child is sick now and a woman is not in the house self you come and get that the man has just .... Have already sent the child to the hospital.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	So what about water issues? Do men .... Men and women who have more information about water issues in Jawani?
Translator:	Women have information on water than men, women have information on water than men.
Shani Haruna:	Why do women have more information on water than men?
Translator:	If there is no water in the house, they will ask woman not a man.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So why would they ask a woman and not the man?
Translator:	Woman I used to fetch water for house activities. Men doesn't go for water for house activities.
Shani Haruna:	So the fact that women have more information about water, does that result or affect the relationship between men and women?
Translator:	Its nature. It won't spoil the relationship, it is nature and men are not using water than women and they also know that it is not a problem.
Shani Haruna:	So we're now going to talk about water use, management and disagreements. So what does she use water for?
Translator:	I use it for cooking, drinking, washing. Bathing, rice parboiling, shea nut parboiling, plastering of houses, flooring of houses.
Shani Haruna:	So how has the brave project helped you to manage your water usage better?
Translator:	Brave project helped me to know that you can harvest water in raining season and store it for dry season activities like plastering, flooring of this thing .... Houses.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And do you ... Does the use of the boreholes and the wells .... Does it result in disagreements in Jawani?
Translator:	No, we don't have disagreements.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	And so how has the brave helped you to increase your income?
Translator:	Help me to improve my income by early harvesting of maize and groundnuts because we used to leave the groundnuts be regermination and the maize too you get to have termites in the this thing ... It will fall down and termites and weevils will enter before you harvest it, and through brave project that is not doing again. That is not happening again. If you harvest them early you have enough for sale and consumption .. House consumption. It helped me to know that you have to select the good grains from the bad ones. And through that selection you have good market than the others.
Shani Haruna:	What about livestock? How has it helped in improving her livestock activities?
Translator:	Brave project helped me to know that you have to guide your livestock in before it can safe. Previously we just leave them outside and you will get to know that they have stolen them, but through brave project we are guiding them and we now have them for our problems.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Then in her opinion, what needs to happen so that you can have more access to water?
Translator:	My opinion is, brave project, if they can help us get someone to ... An NGO to come and drill wells for us in their community.
Shani Haruna:	So apart from the brave project, what .... Where does she think that maybe you can go and ask like for them to help with the water sources?
Translator:	We'll, we will go to district assembly. We will tell district assembly for the this thing .... For drilling of the wells.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	So how would they .... How would she like the district assembly to get involved?
Translator:	Responsible for the community or they're distant. They are responsible for the this thing .... For that, for drilling of boreholes and wells.
Shani Haruna:	So we'll like to thank her so much for her time and for the knowledge and experiences that she has shared with us.
Translator:	She thanked you too for this .... She thanked you too for the recording.


 
 
 
Shani Haruna:	This interview is with 409, anon number 011.
Translator:	I'm Sahadatu Mahama, a translator from 409 to Mr. Shani.
Shani Haruna:	So we would like you to state your full name, your date of birth and whether you are male or female.
Translator:	He's 409, 40 years and he's man.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And does he hold any community positions here?
Translator:	Yes. I'm the organizer of a VSLA box.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So now we would like you to explain what your understanding of the brave project is. What do you know about the .... About it?
Translator:	I learnt in ... I'm in farmer and water project group and I've learned on how to clear land a before ploughing.
Shani Haruna:	And what othing thing else did you learn?
Translator:	It is about clearing of land before ploughing and the application of this thing .... Fertilizer. And if it is .... It is fruiting you go and weed again.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And what did you learn about water under the brave project?
Translator:	I've learned rain water and ploughing across slope, slopes and rain water.
Shani Haruna:	You mentioned rain water. What did you learn about rain water?
Translator:	I've learnt harvesting rain water and if I'm to harvest it I have to clean my things and pour the dirty water, which is first away before I harvest the clean water and keep it.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And what did you also learn about boreholes and then wells?
Translator:	I've learned digging of a well. You use a rope and measure the starting of the well before I'll start digging the well.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And what did you learn about groundwater in the course of the group discussions that you've been part of?
Translator:	I learned about well building and you build the well and put a lid for closing the this thing .... The well for clean water. Every time you are going to sleep you close it and in the morning you open it for the women to fetch and later on you close it so that it won't contaminate.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	So we're now coming to talk about access to weather information and use. The first thing we would like to know is, how did you find out information about the weather last season?
Translator:	I had the weather information from farmer and water project group. And the information was if you are in the farm and it's about to rain, you have to hurry up and cross the river before the rains, if not that if it rains you can't cross the river again,
Shani Haruna:	Apart from the farmer and water group, where else did you find out information about the weather?
Translator:	Only farmer and water group.
Shani Haruna:	Did you hear some information about the weather from radio?
Translator:	No, I've never heard from radio.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	And has agric extension officer been giving you information about the weather?
Translator:	Yes. Extension officer have given me the information and it just from farmer and water project group.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Apart from the farmer and water group, how do you get access to the agric extension officer?
Translator:	Only the farmer and water group that I've been getting them, I don't have them in anywhere again.
Shani Haruna:	And how would you access the agric extension officer if the farmer and water group is not .... The brave project is not there?
Translator:	If it is that I'll get a wireless. Brave project gave me wireless and it has spoilt. So I'll get a wireless to be hearing from agric extension officers for weather information.
Shani Haruna:	Apart from the farmer and water group are there other groups where you find weather information from?
Translator:	No, I don't.
Shani Haruna:	Then how did you find out information about the weather this season?
Translator:	I've heard ... In 2019 I had it the weather information from brave project too.
Shani Haruna:	And which other source apart from the brave project group.
Translator:	No other place again. I've just heard it from the brave project group.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	You mentioned you got weather information, how did you use the information that you received? What did you use that information to do in your farming activities?
Translator:	I learned from weather information .... I learned there will be lightining when it is raining and if there is lightining we shouldn't lean against trees. And I shared the information to people .... To farmers that they shouldn't lean against trees when it is lightining.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Apart from the lightening, what other information did you learn about the rainfall that will help you in your farming activities?
Translator:	If you are to farm and you know that there's no too much moisture in your land you have to sow legumes in your crops so that it will attract moisture for your crops to do well.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And apart from that, which other did you learn about rainfall which will help you in your farming activities?
Translator:	You make bonding and tie ridging in your farm for your rice to have good yield.
Shani Haruna:	So when you heard the information, did you make any changes to the time that you normally sow your crops?
Translator:	I've learned that if you are going to sow and the moisture and like if you're going to do conversational agric you don't have to sow when there is too much moisture in your land. You have to let it dry before you sow. Otherwise if you sow millet it won't germinate.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So before you heard the weather information in what month did you normally sow your crops?
Translator:	I normally sowed my seeds whenever it rains in April, any time, day it rains in April I will go and sow.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So after you heard the weather information in what month did you sow your crops?
Translator:	Now, I used to sow .... Instead of April I'm now sowing in May.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. then before you heard the weather information what varieties were you sowing?
Translator:	I used to sow maize, millette and guinea corn.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And how long did take before they become ready for harvest?
Translator:	They used to be ready at four months time. Maize.
Shani Haruna:	How about the millet?
Translator:	As for the millet and the guinea corn they use to be ready at five months time.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And after you heard the weather information, did you make any changes to the varieties of the maize, the Sorghum and millet that you grow?
Translator:	Yes, I've changed, I've changed the maize, but the millet and the sorghum I didn't change. I've been using the same variety.
Shani Haruna:	So why did you change the maize?
Translator:	Through the weather information that I've heard I've realized that if I change my variety it will be better because if I sowed the one I was using, if there is hunger, I will suffer a lot. So I decided to change the maize so that it will come early and I'll wait for the millet.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And apart from the varieties, what other activities, either in the maize, sorghum and millet, did you change as a result of hearing information about the weather?
Speaker 2:	I don't change .... I didn't do any changes apart from that maize.
Shani Haruna:	So the weather information that you mentioned you heard, in the future, what do you think would be the best way for you to receive it?
Translator:	I would just use a radio set to hear the information.
Shani Haruna:	And apart from the radio which other way or method would you want to or medium would you want to receive the information apart from the radio?
Translator:	I don't know where I will get the information. I don't know where I would like to get the information.
Shani Haruna:	Do you think men listen to radio more than women?
Translator:	Men are listing information from radio than women because they usually open the radio at evening time. And the women are busy cooking in the evening, but the men, if you just come from the farm, you bath and go for prayers. After the prayers you just lie down and be listening your radio.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So what of other times of the day who listens to the radio than the other? Is it men or women?
Translator:	If it is not in the evening time, women are listening more than the men because men always go to their workside in day time. The women are in the house doing their activities.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And do you think men have more phones than women?
Translator:	Well all having equal .... Phones equal because if not the oldmen and oldwomen, for the youth and the men they have .... They both have phones equal.
Shani Haruna:	Why do you think they both have equal?
Translator:	There reason why both men and women have equal phones is that most of the times you have your child at far place. You want to communicate with that child, and two, we want to be using it to hear information from if they are announcing something in the radio and you want to ask something from the radio you call.
Shani Haruna:	What kind .... Do agric extension officers normally give you information about water management and weather when they visit you?
Translator:	Yes. They've ever said the information in our farmer and water group. They meet me there and I have ... They talk to me.
Shani Haruna:	And apart from the farmer and water group, do you have access to agric extension officers?
Translator:	Apart from the farmer and water group, I've never received their information anywhere.
Shani Haruna:	Why haven't you received their information?
Translator:	They didn't come and I don't know where to go and meet them and access the information.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. what crops do you normally grow?
Speaker 2:	I said maize, millet and sorghum.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And how did you find out information about the millet, maize and sorghum last year?
Translator:	From brave project that I've heard the information about the seeds. They said they have improved seeds, like rice, sorghum and maize.
Shani Haruna:	And how did ... Apart from the brsve which other source did you find information about your crops?
Translator:	I didn't hear the information anywhere apart from brave project.
Shani Haruna:	So for this season, the one that just ended, how did you find out information about the maize, millet and then sorghum?
Translator:	Just in the brave project that I've heard it again.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And if your crop had a disease, how did you find out that it had a disease? And what did you do about it?
Translator:	If you had a disease or how to know that your crops are having disease, you see the leaves with holes. So you get somebody who knows where to get the chemical for you to message that person or go to your community input dealer and buy the chemicals and go and spray the crops.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	And the informations that...... In the future, what do you think would be the best way for you to receive information about your crops?
Translator:	I would like to have the information from the brave project and if the brave project is not ... I'll just follow my members who are in that group so that if they go, they'll hear the information and tell me.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Then the informations you have been hearing on the radio, what changes did you use the information to do or make in your livestock rearing?
Translator:	I've known, changed my this thing .... In building a husbandary for my animals because unless the previous I was just .... They were just outside roaming and whenever I wants them I'll go and pick the one I'm in need. So now I used to build for them to be saved.
Shani Haruna:	And apart from the houses, what other changes did you make in your livestock rearing?
Translator:	If you .... For the good care for the animals you will find .... If any time you sees that the animal is sick, you will go and get veterinary officer to come and immunize or give mebendazole to the animal.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	So besides the immunization and then the housing did you make any other changes to your livestock rearing activities?
Translator:	No, I didn't.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	Then how did you find out the well monitoring training that you received?
Translator:	I didn't have any training on well monitoring.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And do you think men and women have access to different information here in Jawani?
Translator:	They all have the same information.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Sowhy do you think they all have the same information?
Translator:	If a man had an information, if you want to say it to someone like a woman, she will also say the same information ... Share the same information that you've heard. So they all share the same information.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And do you think men get more information about water than women?
Translator:	Women have more information in water than men, because women fetch water for their activities more than men. That's why they had the information than men.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And does that affect relationship between men and women?
Translator:	It will not .... It doesn't have any effect because women, if there is a problem, like water problem, if women say to the men, they will help them to solve it. So it won't have any affect in the relationship.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So we're now going to talk about water use, management and disagreements? So what do you normally use water for?
Translator:	We use water for cooking, drinking and bathing. That's all.
Shani Haruna:	What other activities apart from the ones that you mentioned that do you use water for?
Translator:	We use water for building of our houses, washing and plastering.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So the activities that you just mentioned, what has allowed you to plan your water better?
Translator:	If it is raining season, you harvest rainwater in a drum and keep it for your activities.
Shani Haruna:	What other things do you do?
Translator:	I don't know what to do and save it again, and manage it for my activities again.
Shani Haruna:	And have you changed how you use water because of this.
Translator:	Like if you're having water problem because you have harvest water for your activities, the problem ... You won't get the problem again.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And how has that brave helped you to manage your water better?
Translator:	You will boil the water that you stored for your this thing ... Your activities whenever it have worms you boil it and store it again.
Shani Haruna:	Apart from the boiling, what other way has the brave helped you to manage your water better?
Translator:	After the boiling you have to roof it well so that it will not dirty .... It will not contaminate.
Shani Haruna:	How has the brave helped your community?
New Speaker:	They've helped it. Brave have help us boiling water to be clean for us in the community. So the way it helps It's good for us, for the boiling of the water to be clean.
New Speaker:	And would you say water usage results in disagreements here in Jawani?
Translator:	It has disagreement. It has disagreement because someone will come first and the other one will come and want to fetch before the first person. That's the time that the disagreement will come.
Shani Haruna:	And how has the brave help to improve such disagreements?
Translator:	Brave have help to advise the last person who came and it was ... And the disagreement was there. You advice her not to repeat that again next time.
Shani Haruna:	And which other way does he think the brave project has helped again in resolving such disagreements?
Translator:	I didn't know anything again.
Shani Haruna:	In your opinion, what needs to happen to improve water access and management in Jawani?
Speaker 2:	In future I would like to say if we will have have a section meeting because we have sections boreholes and the boreholes are broken down. So we will have meet and discuss on how to repair the boreholes and contribute. If we should drill one, we will contribute and get to assembly for borehole drilling so that we will have more boreholes in future.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And how has the brave helped you to improve your income and assets?
Translator:	It has ..... It has help to plan for the sales of your product before you sell. Unless previous we were just selling by heart. And you don't know the price of your product. You just sell. But project brave has made us to plan before and know the market from the business women and men before selling our products.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So what other thing changed here in Jawani since the brave project started?
Speaker 2:	It has change .... Brave project has change in harvesting water. In previous, we don't know if you harvest, water and store the water for your water usage. But now we know that you can store water and manage it for your water activities.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. what other change has happened apart from the water storage .... Apart from water harvesting?
Translator:	I didn't see any changes again.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. We'll like to thank you so much for your time and then the experiences that you have shared with us.
Speaker 2:	I've also thanked for your time in interviewing me in this project.

 
 
 
Shani Haruna:	This interview is with 410, annon number 010.
Translator:	My name is Sahadatu Mahama. I'm a translator from 410 to Mr Shani.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So we would like to know her full name.
Translator:	Her name is 410. She's 65 years old. She's female.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. does she hold any community positions?
Translator:	No.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Sowe now ... We now want her to explain what her understanding of the brave project is.
Translator:	They ... They've encouraged us .... Brave has encouraged us to have improve things in our community to develop our community.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. What kind of encouragement do they give you?
Translator:	They encourage us on farming activities to have good yields in our farms.
Shani Haruna:	What did you learn about water under the brave project?
Translator:	We harvest ... I have learned harvesting of water and if you're going to harvest the water you have to let the first water drop before you put something to harvest the water.
Shani Haruna:	What first water?
Translator:	Water which is coming .... Which the rain in starts. The start water. When it starts, we shouldn't harvevest it, you shouldn't collect it. You should let it fall and you ... It will clean the this thing ... The zinc before you take the ... You put something to harvest it.
Shani Haruna:	Then what did you learn about your boreholes and then your Wells?
Translator:	I learned the cleanness of the water. Borehole water is clean than the stream water and well too is clean. The reason why borehole is clean is that the water from the borehole doesn't have any dirt in it because it is on the ground ... Under the ground. But the stream water, they used to ... It used to run and they wash clothings inside it. Pigs are swimming in it. That's why I said it's not good for consumption.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And where did she find out information about the weather last season?
Translator:	I heard the information from brave people ... Brave project.
Shani Haruna:	How did they get the information to her?
Translator:	They came to our committee for meeting ... Group meeting and they told us the ... I heard the information at that meeting.
Shani Haruna:	What did she hear about the weather?
Translator:	They say we will have enough rain this .... There is a normal rain this year and we will have lightining, thunders and cloundy .... Lightining and thunders this year and the rain will be above rainfall this year.
Shani Haruna:	And where did ... How did she find out information about the weather this season?
Translator:	The same brave project that I've heard the information.
Shani Haruna:	So apart from the brave project, which other source did she hear information about the weather?
Translator:	From radio stations like the Tizaa radio, Nobel radio, URA FM and Eagle FM
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And what did she use the information to do?
Translator:	I use improve variety ... Early variety to plant in my farm for the rain this thing .... Pattern. Because if I plant early variety for the starting I'll get it, and if in the middle too I plant since there will be rain I'll have it. So I did that.
Shani Haruna:	So apart from the early varieties, what other changes did she use the info ... The weather information to make one her farm?
Translator:	I prepare my land for ploughing and if it rains I will go and plough for the rain ... Onset the rain to come so that hour I'll Just go and plant my this thing .... Groundnuts or maize.
Shani Haruna:	So in the future, what would be the best way for her to receive the Weather information?
Translator:	I will still have my ... Get my information from brave project and radio stations.
Shani Haruna:	So apart from the brave and then the radio station, which other means do you think is best for you to get weather information?
Translator:	I'll be hearing the information from a phone calls and ... That's phone calls with the radio stations.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Do you think men listen to the radio more than women?
Translator:	Listen to radio discussion then radio information than men. Women listen to radio information than men.
Shani Haruna:	Why do you think women listen more than men?
Translator:	Women listen to radio than ... Radio information than men because women have time for radio information than men.
Shani Haruna:	And do you think men have more phones than women?
Translator:	Men have phones than women because men have less expenditure than women. Women have more expenditure.
Shani Haruna:	Why do women have more expenditure than men?
Translator:	Men have less expenditure because they don't give housekeeping money for the house consumption. Even there is a time ... Getting to May ... Is it May, June or .... April, May, June .... If not women who are feeding the house ... Men cannot feed house again. Women are buying food and ingredience for the house to be satisfied.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. what kind of information do agric extension officers give about water management when they visit?
Translator:	They normally give health ... Personal hygiene information on water for the farmers. They talked on water management for farm ... Our crops that we should level our this thing .... Farm land before sowing our crops to have good yield. How we can do and manage water in our farms for the crops.
Shani Haruna:	So what crops do you grow?
Translator:	I normally cultivate maize and okro.
Shani Haruna:	Then how did you find out information about the maize and okro?
Translator:	Brave people showed how to .... I learned from brave group how to sow .... To do my sowing in the farm and most I didn't change my variety. I am just using what I've been using because I don't have money for the seeds to buy.
Shani Haruna:	Apart from the brave, which other source did you get your information about that maize?
Translator:	I hadthe information from the VSLA groups.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. then, the informations that you have been hearing on the radio what changes
Speaker 2:	To your farming activities Did you use that information to make?
Translator:	I've been doing conversational agric but now I used to plough one acre through this thing .... Brave project that changed me on my farming activities. So I used to plough one acre which I can manage and get good yield.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	How did you find the Well monitoring training that you received?
Translator:	She didn't ... She didn't get any monitoring training.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. then do you think men and women have access to different information?
Translator:	Both men and women have the same information because men are not part of group meetings with agric people. But women .... Most of the women are in groups and they hear the information from groups and they go home and shared the information with their husbands in the house. So they all have the same information all together.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And do you think men get more information about water than women?
Translator:	Women have water information than men. Because women fetch water for home activities and everything. So they have information than men.
Shani Haruna:	And does that affect the relationship between men and women?
Translator:	It will not have any affect because they know that women are fetching water for them to do everything. So they will not have ... It will not have affect.
Shani Haruna:	So we're now coming to talk about water use, management and disagreements. So what does she use water for?
Translator:	We use water for Bathing, cooking, drinking, building of houses, Plastering, Flooring of houses and washing.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So how has the brave helped you to manage your water use better?
Translator:	Brave project .... To manage water is we should fetch water and keep it in a clean containers, cover it from dust.
Shani Haruna:	And would she say that the use of that water sources, that's the boreholes and the wells, result in disagreements?
Translator:	No, there is no disagreement in boreholes or ... There is no disagreement in boreholes or wells.
Shani Haruna:	Why are there no disagreements? Or you haven't experienced it yet?
Translator:	I haven't experienced it yet.
Shani Haruna:	So in her opinion, what does she think needs to happen to improve water access and management?
Translator:	Opinion is if brave would have give us boreholes or assembly .... Assembly would have, give us a borehole. District assembly sould have give us borehole.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Then how has the bave helped her to increase her income?
Translator:	It helped us to manage our livestock rearing through the feeding and the gathering of the livestock in the house and for them not to be roaming about for thieves to steal them. So they're just .... If you are feeding them well, they used to be healthy and you can sell them at any time you want and they are well for good market.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And what about the crops? How?
Translator:	I cleaned my maize for ... And the maize have good yield and the storage, I put thngs on the room with a ventilation for it to be good and when ever I want to sell, I will take it and get good market for that.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So we'd like to thank youfor your time and the experience and knowledge you have shared with us.
Translator:	I also thanked for the time you've used for interviewing me. Thank you.

 
 
 
Shani Haruna:	This is interview with 411 anon number 013.
Translator:	I'm Sahadatu Mahama and I am the translator from 411 to Mr. Shani.
Shani Haruna:	So thanks so much. It's good to have you to speak with you. Okay. So we would like her to state her full name.
Translator:	She's 411.
Shani Haruna:	And what is her date of birth?
Translator:	She is 63.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And it she male or female?
Translator:	Female.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And does she hold any position here?
Translator:	She is a VSLA chairperson.
Shani Haruna:	Okay, so now we would like to know, what is her understanding of the brave project?
Translator:	That brave project is about the capacity building to the groups.
Shani Haruna:	And what did she learn under the brave project?
Translator:	That she learns ... She learned farming.
Shani Haruna:	What about the farming did she learn?
Translator:	To go and visit .... She learns to go and visit the farm and know when and how ... The acres that she will farm for the next year season.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. besides that what other thing did she learn from the brave project?
Translator:	She learns the measurement of the sowing. Yes.
Shani Haruna:	What did she learn about water?
Translator:	She learned how to harvest rainwater for her house consumption and for farm use. Last .... For the previous, she doesn't know that the water is important, but now she learnt that the water is important for her to harvest it and store for her home activities.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So how does she harvest the water?
Translator:	She borrowed money from the VSLA box and bought a drum and Jerry cans for harvesting the water and storage.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	Then what did she learn about boreholes and then wells?
Speaker 3:	That she learns to dug a hand well for water to be used. And the water .... When she learned that she learns to make .... To keep the well well for clean water to be used.
Shani Haruna:	So has she been able to dig her own well?
Translator:	She learns how .... Because of that she learns how to dig ..... She was able to dig a well, but the well get to a stone ... A rock in which she can't break the rock and she ignore it. But the hand dug wells .... Small small hand dug wells, she dug it in the farm for water to be used for the farm.
Shani Haruna:	We're now going to talk about access to weather information and then use. Under this discussion the first thing we would like to know is, how did she find out information about the weather last season?
Translator:	She learned that 2018 the rain was normal but 2019 it was above.
Shani Haruna:	So the 2018 weather, where did she get the information from?
Translator:	She says the Agric officers used to spread the information for them to hear. And we have rain gauge recoders, they too they talk, they give information on rain ... About rainfall.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So how did the agric officers and get the information to them ... To her?
Translator:	They come to the community in a group and ....
Shani Haruna:	Okay, so apart from the agric officers and then the rain gauge, which other source did she get information about the weather from?
Translator:	That she has .... She had the information from groups and radio discussions.
Shani Haruna:	What kind of group and which radio station?
Translator:	Vsla groups and tizaa radio, nobel radio from Nalerigu.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	Apart from those ones .... The radio stations that you mentioned, which other radio station did she listen to?
Translator:	Ura radio from Bolga.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	The agric officers that she mentioned, how she get them to get the information about the weather?
Translator:	That there is a community meeting in the community whereby the agric officers comes to their group meetings and some in vsla groups, community groups, wherever they have a group they'll invite the officers to come.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	So apart from the VSLA groups are there other places where she gets the weather information from?
Translator:	From radio stations. Apart from radio stations, she doesn't hear it from any place again.
Shani Haruna:	So you've ... How did you also find out information about the weather this season? The one that just ended.
Translator:	For 2019 she hears the information from Gmet and radio stations as she has been hearing and the vsla groups and the rain gauge recorders ... From the recorders.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	So the rain gauge recorders, what do they do with the information that they record?
Translator:	The rain gauge recorders, they will record the day, the date and the rain pattern and they'll come to a group and say, this rain has .... We have heavy rain today or yesterday we have heavy rain and anytime there is a little rain they will come and say we have rain. This rain was small. It was not enough. And especially the onset day .... The onset day.... They'll record it. They'll say .... If the rain for ... They hear the information from PSP participatory scenario planning group meetings. So if they come with that and they'll tell them the onset date and if the rails it comes on that day or the week and the rain is not enough for planting, they'll announce it. They'll say it in the groups that this rain is not enough for planting or for sowing. And if the rain is enough for sowing, they'll say this rain is enough for sowing. Maybe sometimes the rain will rain and it will enough for sowing "niri" but not groundnuts or maize. So that information that they have been hearing from the rain gauge recorders.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So now the weather information that she heard, what Did she do it to those information?
Translator:	Now that I've been hearing it, the information for the weather, I used to know the outcome of farming or rainfall than previous that I was doing.
Shani Haruna:	So what did she use the information to do in her farming?
Translator:	I use that to sow my my maize, the onset day. I use the onset day of the rain to sow my maize.
Shani Haruna:	So what other changes did she make because she heard information about the weather?
Translator:	I've used the knowledge that I've heard to plough than previous because when I was not hearing it, I used to just farm anyhow. But now I'm using the information to sow my crops.
Shani Haruna:	So apart from the .... So apart from the sowing time, which you said you've .... It helped you to know when to sow are there other things that you changed in your farming activities as a result of hearing the weather information?
Translator:	I used to to weed early than how I was doing because previous I was not weeding early in my farm, but now I used to weed early for the crops to grow fast.
Shani Haruna:	Then, did you make any changes to the varieties that you grow?
New Speaker:	She changed soya bean and groundnuts planting. She's changed where .... She has changed variety by soyabean when she harvest maize this year, and next year she used to change variety to plant the ... She doesn't cross planting, she doesn't plant one plot every year.
Shani Haruna:	She mentioned something about the new varieties. What varieties did she start using?
Translator:	I was just sowing groundnuts and maize, but I have changed a new variety like soya bean. I'm now sowing soya bean in addition to my seeds.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	How long does it take your maize varieties to be ready for harvesting?
Translator:	3 months variety, that's 90 days.
Shani Haruna:	And, the old varieties that you use, how long was it taking before harvesting?
Translator:	That variety was five months.
Shani Haruna:	So what about the groundnuts? How long does the variety that she sows now it takes to be ready for harvesting?
Translator:	If we plant the groundnuts and the drought hasn't come you will harvest it in three months time, but if there is drought spell it will get to four months.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	How long did the old variety used to take before it was ready for harvesting?
Translator:	That old groundnuts was just three and a half months.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So did she make any changes to her livestock rearing because of the weather information that she heard?
Translator:	Yes, I've changed.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	What changes did she make to her livestock rearing?
Translator:	I've changed my livestock Rearing. Previous, I don't have a room for them, but now I have room for them and I used to convey rice husks to spread in the room. I used to gather them in the evening inside the rooms. I now have feeds for them. If we farm and I get this beans leaves, I will harvest the beans leaves and keep for them for dry season grazing. And I used to call veterinary officers to come and attend to my livestock.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So in the future, what is the best way she thinks she can have access to weathat information? What does she think is the best way to access for her to access weather information?
Translator:	I'll be hearing from ... I like to be hearing from radio stations and the from the rain gauge who they should encourage building the rain gauge recorders' information's that from this thing .... From Weather ... Giving weather information to rain gauge recorders so that they will spread it for them to be hearing.
Shani Haruna:	So she mentioned she hears the information from the radio. Who owns the radio ... The wireless sets that she listens to?
Translator:	I have my own wireless set to be hearing because brave project gave me a wireless for that.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So, men and women, who does she think listen to radio more?
Translator:	Women are hearing it more than men because men used to operate it and go out. But women are still in the house that evening for their house activities so they hear more than men.
Shani Haruna:	And men and women who does she think have more phones than the other?
Translator:	Men have phones than women.
Shani Haruna:	Why does she think it's so?
Translator:	Men have more than women because women are suspected by the husbands if a woman is having the phone.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	So you mentioned she grows .... She grows maize, groundnuts and soya beans. Okay. So last season, how did she find out information about that crops that she grows?
Translator:	Yes, she heard the information from vsla groups, community meetings and we have a apex body ... Vsla apex body meeting .... From there .... I have been hearing from that groups. The seeds .... Improves seeds from that group.
Shani Haruna:	So the VSLA apex body, what does it do?
Translator:	It ... We have the VSLAs from the communities. All the VSLA groups have one group at Nalerigu in which they meet and discuss. They open bank accounts. They have cooperative certificate. Assembly people knows about them. Whenever they have this thing .... And they are doing contribution. They are advocating, their vsla activities and lobbying for farm farming activities. Whenever they have a problem they goes to assembly and lobby for help.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	What about last season? How did she ... Where did ... How did she find out information about the crops that she grows?
Translator:	2019?
Shani Haruna:	Yes, 2019.
Translator:	I've heard it from the same places that I have mentioned and from brave project too.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	In the future, what will be the best way for her to receive such information?
Translator:	I want hear .... In future about ... I want to hear the information from radio stations and I like the radio station by God's grace to be in our own community so that I'll be hearing from there.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So apart from the radio station which other way does she think is best for her to receive the information?
Translator:	I would like to hear it from the groups I've been hearing and from brave people to extend the groups and give the informations in the groups so that I'll be hearing it from the groups.
Shani Haruna:	The radio programs that she has been hearing, either on the weather or generally on the farming activities, we would like to know what activitieseither in her farming or livestock rearing, did she make any changes to as a result of the information that she heard on the radio.
Translator:	I have change in maize harvesting. Previous, I was just looking at the maize to be dry with the stalks and everything. But now if I just get inside and saw one wet maize, I'll start harvesting
Shani Haruna:	What about the groundnuts? What .... Have you made any changes in that one too?
Translator:	I looked at my groundnuts when .... I monitor my groundnuts every time and whenever I get the groundnuts leaves being red I will pick one and see inside ... And dehusk and see what the ... How it is, and if the husk is black inside, I would just know that it has .... It is okay for harvesting. But previous I will leave it and say it is not yet regrwoing .... Regerminating before I harvest. But now I don't stand to get the regerminating before I harvest.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So how did she find the Well monitoring training that she received?
Translator:	She's not part of the committee, she didn't take any training on well monitoring.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So in her opinion does she think that men and women have access to different information?
Translator:	Yes. Men have .... Men and women have different informations because men roam their way and women too go and gather with their fellow women. So men will have their information from their group or their sitting place and women too will bring their information from where they come from. So they will all come and share it together.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So what kind of information do women normally have?
Translator:	I can't give a particular answer on that information.
Shani Haruna:	So do women get more information about water more than men?
Translator:	Yes women have more information in water than men.
Shani Haruna:	Why do women have more information about water than men?
Translator:	Mecause women use water than men. That's why women always have information about water than men.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So does that affect the relationship between men and women?
Translator:	It have good relationship with men and women because they will get the information and get the water for men to do ..... It have a good relationship to men and women because women will get the water information and use it as what men wants to do with the water.
Shani Haruna:	So we're now coming to talk about water uses, the management and disagreements. What does she normally use water for? What activities does she use water for?
Translator:	I use it for cooking, bathing, drinking and business. Using it for rice business.
Shani Haruna:	What kind of rice business?
Translator:	She use it for rice .... Parboiling of rice for sale.
Shani Haruna:	Sowhat has allowed her to plan her water use better?
Translator:	Through brave project that I've learned that I can save money and buy a drum for water storage and because I can store water .... I used to get water from the vsla and buy rice for parboiling. And it has use for me to manage my water and do that.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	So how has that brave project helped her to be able to manage her water better?
Translator:	Brave have built my capacity on storage of water .... Harvesting water and storage. And through that I have .... I get my drums for water to do my this thing ..... To manage my activities.
Shani Haruna:	So in her opinion, what needs to happen to improve water access?
Translator:	We will see the chief and the elders to have a community meeting on how to do and get more wells .. Hand-Dugs wells for the community to have access to improved water.
Shani Haruna:	So, what about the water the water that she uses on her farms? The dry season farming that ... The hand-dug wells that she mentioned.... What does she think needs to happen so that she can have more water to farm?
Translator:	You have to look carefully and fence the this thing ... The hand-dug wells for animals not to step inside it and you come and convey the first water, which is full and dirty for them in a different hole for them to come and be drinking and leave that one. If not raining season that one will not do anything. It will not spoil.
Shani Haruna:	And where are those hand-dug wells? Where do you dig them?
Translator:	At the stream side. They will go and dig them by .... Some are ... If the stream water is not more there running, they will just dig by the edges there so that they will be using that too.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So finally, how has the brave project helped you to increase your income?
Translator:	Help me to have a business because I used to harvest water and do a parboiling of rice for sale. So it generates income for me.
Shani Haruna:	Is there any other source that she makes income?
Translator:	It helps me to have an income because the livestock rearing, I used to learn when and what and how I will handle my livestock. And now I have more livestock to be selling. If anytime I wants to sell, like if I was telling five cedi, I'll now sell it 10 cedi because it have a good care.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So we'll like to say thank you for your time and for sharing your experiences with us. We're much grateful speaking to you.
Translator:	I also thanked for what you've interview me and you have time for me to talk. Thank you.

 
 
 
Shani Haruna:	This interview is with 412, anon number 012.
Translator:	I'm Sahadatu Mahama. I'm a translator from 412 to Mr. Shani.
Shani Haruna:	So we would like her to state her full name.
Translator:	Her name is 412.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. What is her date of birth?
Translator:	45, 45 years.
Shani Haruna:	Is she male or female?
Translator:	She's a female.
Shani Haruna:	And do you hold any community positions?
Translator:	She's a dickness in Pentecost Church. She's dickness pentecost church, TBA in health Voluntary and a chairperson for SET committee. The SET committee is community emergency transport committee.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So the .... So now we would like to know what her understanding of the brave project is.
Translator:	She understand it to be farmer and water group.
Shani Haruna:	And what did she learn under the brave?
Translator:	I've learnt a lot from brave project. First, I've learned the clearing of land for ploughing. I have learned harvesting of water and storage.
Shani Haruna:	And what else?
Translator:	I've also learned the rearing of livestock to improve their healthiness and their feedings.
Shani Haruna:	So what did you learn about the water?
Translator:	I've learned about the water storage on how to .... How it's use .... The usage that we use it to plaster our houses, wash .... For washing and bathing.
Shani Haruna:	What kind of water?
Translator:	The first rain water.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And what did you also learn about groundwater?
Translator:	I have something ... I've learned something about the this thing .... The groundwater. I've learned that borehole water is cleaner than hand-dug wells because .... The reason why I've said that is the hand-dug wells we have containers which we use to fetch the water and we didn't .... There is no sanitation in that containers. That's why they will use it for fetching the water with dirty rope, so it will contaminate the water. That's why I say borehole water is good than the well waters and the well waters too ... You can .... If it hasn't have a lid, someone will come and put something inside it, it will contaminate it. So that's why I say it is not, it's not good like borehole water but they're all coming from the ground. The reason why I said the borehole water is clean than well water is that, if you are a good sanitation ... This thing .... Good woman, you bring your clean pan or container to fetch the water. And if you are not this thing ... Good hygiene ... You bring your dirty thing to fetch. So you send your dirty to your house and that person too will send her cleanness to the house. So it's not like the this thing ... The well water .... The well water, they will bring the dirty and put inside the water so that you all fetch it. You are clean and you come and fetch the dirty water. That's why he says they are two different water.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So, we'll now talk about access to weather information. How did you find out information about the weather last season?
Translator:	I just heard it from brave project.
Shani Haruna:	How did you hear it?
Translator:	From gmet people. I heard it from Gmet people and brave project meeting.
Shani Haruna:	So apart from brave and then gmet, which others sources did you get weather information from?
Translator:	From radio stations. Radio stations ... Nobel radio and tizaa radio and Eagle FM, and ura radio.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So for this season, how did you find out information about the weather?
Translator:	I had the information from brave project through gmet people and rainngauge data collectors and VSLA group discussions. I heard it from them.
Shani Haruna:	So, apart from these sources, if you were to ask for weather information, where would you or who would you ask for such information?
Translator:	First we were getting our information, like signs and symptoms and the this thing ... Like some will say the nest of a birds, if they are up, it means the trees which are in the stream, if the nests are up, there will be rain ... Above rain. And if the this thing .... The nests are down there'll be low rainfall. That's what we were observing when we asked the rain callers. But after this project we will get the information from the radio stations and the met people.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So the weather information that you had, what did you ... How did it help you in your farming activities?
Translator:	It helped me because my farm was having erosions. Since I've learned a lot in brave project, I made a farm bonding on my farm ... In my farm and I couldn't experience it this year.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So what other changes did you make in your farming activities?
Translator:	It has changed a lot because since I was ... I have been farming in the farm the erosion was in my farm. But when I've learned from brave project, I used to have a gutter for the erosion, so the water didn't pass through my this thing .... My land. And because of that, I had enough food in that land this year. I changed my maize variety seeds. So I've planted wandata ... The red wandata maize and it has done .... I have good yield.
Shani Haruna:	What made you to sow the new maize variety the wandata?
Translator:	I made my mind to change the variety .... The maze because I was planting the long time variety, but I made my mind to change the short variety and see whether the .... I've made the bonding ... Will it help or not. That's why I changed.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So the weather information, in the future, what would .... What would be the best way for you to receive the weather information?
Translator:	We'll get the information from radio stations.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	Men and women, who listen to radio more than the other?
Translator:	In my opinion, I think that men are listening to radio discussion than women because men have ... If they just come from their farm they will bath and lie down. But women are working in the evening and they used to listen to the radio at evening time. So women used to have work in the evening more than men. That's why men are listening from radio than women.
Shani Haruna:	So is there a better way that a women can get weather information apart from the radio sets?
Translator:	Women used to get the weather information from groups because they used to have group discussions in thier groups and they have community monitors who are facilitating the groups. So they had to give the information from where ... If they went for the meeting.
Shani Haruna:	Men ... Do men have more phones than women?
Speaker 2:	Women have phones than men especially the this thing ... The youth girls and boys, both of them have phones equal.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So why is .... Why do women have more phones than men?
Translator:	Women have ... Women have phones more than men because women ... The girls or the youth used to go for kayayo and they prefer giving money to their mothers than fathers. So, they will send money. Some are sending mobile money, but some are sending them through human this thing .... So they'll call and tell the mother the amount that she has given to somebody to bring to her so that she will know that they have sent her money, amount of this before the person will come home.
Shani Haruna:	So do the agric extension officers give you information about water management?
Translator:	Yes, they do?
Shani Haruna:	And what kind of information do they give you about water management?
Translator:	Yes, we have extension officers who are ... Who talks about water management to us. And they say we should harvest water and how to keep the water for household activities. And we have a problem on harvesting water because we don't have enough or big things to harvest the water. Like if we had a person who can build like a water tanks ... Sand water tanks for us, we would have preferred building that ones for water harvesting.
Shani Haruna:	So what crops do you grow?
Translator:	I sowed only maize.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So how did you find out information about your maize?
Translator:	I heard from a brave project meeting and it was conversation from a group member who did agric demonstration farm and had the seeds. So I heard from that place and I looked for the seeds and plant to see how it will be.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	What did you hear about the crop that made you to go and buy that maize and then sowed?
Translator:	Yes, the information that I had and I was eager to get the maize was that I heard it from brave project as I said. But I saw the plants itself, how it fruit and how it had this thing ... The yield. And that was 2018, so I insist getting it from that farmer to get the same yield. And for that matter, when I had it and I sowed it in 2019, I've never had maize like this year sowing .... This year maize. So that's why I was insisting to get that same seeds.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So, how did you know if your crops had a disease? How did you find out?
Translator:	You'll start repairing your seed by this time after harvesting. If you didn't prepare for the raining season and you get to that time and looking for the seeds, you won't get the good seads. So You have to prepare the seeds from this time to raining season so that you get good seeds. How you know that your this thing ... Your crops are having disease by monitoring them. If you monitor them after planting ... Sowing them, you monitor them for some stage so that you'll know that it is having a disease.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So when you find out that your crop has a disease. What next steps do you do?
Translator:	If you monitor and see that it has pests, you make mofa people to hear what .... You will draw their attention that you have your crops with pests so that they will show you the chemical that you will use, or they will give you. This year 2019 they were giving the chemical free for the pests. They will give you the chemical for the pest too.
Shani Haruna:	Soby what means do you draw their attention?
Translator:	We have village based agents in our community. So if I get that crops getting pests I will inform the VBA so that, she or he will send the information to agric and tell them to come and monitor it. But we have .... Now we have agric officer in for our community. So we'll just tell the VBA to tell the agric officer so that he or she will come and see them and give you the chemical for spraying it.
Shani Haruna:	So the radio information that you have been hearing, either on the project .... What changes did you make to your farming activities or livestock rearing?
Translator:	Changes have been done because I was just ... I will just .... I was not prepared for the season. But through brave project I decided to prepare for the season and for seed. So I prepared and bought improved seed for the season. So this year I have changes I've done in my farm by having improved seeds for sowing.
Shani Haruna:	Did you make any changes to the time that you start planting and what change is it?
Translator:	I have changes I have done because I've learned .... I've know the onset of .... I have now know onset of raining season and I used to have the date ... The month that I can plant and get good yield. So I have not been planting when .... Sowing when it just rain. I wait for the onset day before I plant.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So how did you find the well monitoring training that you received?
Translator:	No, I don't have any thing about the well monitoring because I didn't take part in the training.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	And do you think men and women have access to different information?
Translator:	Men and women have different info .... They had different information.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	So what kind of information do women get?
Translator:	Women and men have different this thing .... Women have their groups for discussing and they discuss about their household activities and men have their farm activities discussions. They will discuss in their group on their farm activities. And women will discuss in their group on their household activities. So they have different informations all together.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So do men get more information about water than women.
Translator:	Women have water information than men because men are not fetching water. Women are fetching water and they know the problems of water in the Riverside. Men just have to come and fetch water and do whatever they want to do. That's why women have water information than men.
Shani Haruna:	So does that affect the relationship between men and women?
Translator:	It has bad relationship between the women and the men because sometimes getting to dry sseason like this the stream water will stop and there'll be no water in the stream. It would've been the responsibility of the men to go and dig the hand-dug well but they won't do unless the women are coming to suffer before they will realize that ... Some few will realize that they should have do this for them? Not all of them. So that will spoil their relationship.
Shani Haruna:	Soin such a situation, what do they do?
Translator:	Men will go down ... At that point, few men will go down to the stream and dig the hand-dug wells for the woman to get water and come home.
Shani Haruna:	So we're now going to talk about water use, management and disagreements. So what do you use water for?
Translator:	We use water for drinking, bathing, washing, building, flooring and so on.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	And what has helped you to plan how you use the water for those activities better?
Translator:	I and my husband will plan how to get water or how to plan to build our ... To do our building this year. So we'll plan how to get money and get water or whatever we need to plan it to build.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	So how has the brave project helped you to manage water better?
Speaker 2:	Brave has helped me to harvest water by building my capacity on harvesting and storage. But I have no enough cans to store the water, but I know how to store water ... Harvest water and store for my .... And manage for my this thing .... My activities.
Shani Haruna:	So would you say the usage of the boreholes and then the wells, it results in the disagreements?
Translator:	Yes. It results disagreement because you will go there to fetch water by morning. You sit like 6.00am and you get to 6.30am, 6.20am. Someone will come to that time and wants to fetc before you. It will result disagreement there. The first person won't agree.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So how has brave helped you to improve such disagreements?
Translator:	If it is me, I will just exercise patience and tell my colleagues to exercise patience for her to fetch only her barrels and go and leave us to fetch our water.
Shani Haruna:	So how has the brave helped in improving or in enabling you to resolve such disagreements?
Translator:	The harvesting of the rainwater would have solve that problem because if you have enough rain water in your house, you won't go and stand for disagreement in the river. But we don't have large containers to store water or to harvest water. That is what ... And we don't know how to do and this disagreement won't come.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So in your opinion, what needs to happen so that you can have more access to water?
Translator:	We will contribute and get to assembly and see whether the can come and drill boreholes for us or wells for us so that we'll have enough water in the community.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So finally how has the brave helped you to improve your income?
Translator:	We have .... Brave have helped us to know that if you have your good yield, you will have market on that yield than bad yield. So if you have a good yield, you get money and you can manage your income in the this thing .... And if you have your livestock rearing like feeding them, guiding them and they will be healthy .... Looking at their health place and they'll be healthy. You'll have enough money to do your activities smoothly. So you manage your income and be safe.
Shani Haruna:	So, we thank you so much for sharing your experience and for the time that you have shared with us.
Translator:	She has thank you for the time you use for interviewing her today.


 
 
 
Shani Haruna:	This interview is with 413, annon number 007.
Translator:	I'm sahadatu Mahama, the translator from 413 to Mr Shani.
Shani Haruna:	So we would like you to state your full name, date of birth and whether it's female or male.
Translator:	Her name is 413. She's 46 years old. She is a woman.
Shani Haruna:	And does she hold any community positions?
Translator:	No she hasn't.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So now we would like her to explain what her understanding of the brave project is.
Translator:	My understanding of farmer and water project is ... My understanding the of brave project is that, we are learning on farm farming activities, which we learn how to farm, the time ... The period of farming, the period of harvesting and so on.
Shani Haruna:	What did you learn about water under the brave project?
Translator:	We learned that the hand-dug wells water is fine ... Is good for drinking, unless the stream, water. That water is contaminated water.
Shani Haruna:	And what did you also learn about groundwater?
Translator:	I've learned that the well water is clean than the stream water. So we have a well water, which we had a lid for the well in which we fetch and close, but we don't have borehole, we have broken boreholes in .... Which are not working.
Shani Haruna:	How did she find out information about the weather last season and this season?
Translator:	For 2018, I've heard the information on weather that we will have normal rainfall, which was true. It started with small, small and later on it comes, heavy rains. It rains heavy rains and spoiled our food. But 2019, it was just heavy rainfalls which was coming from the starting up to the end and it is above rainfall as they said.
Shani Haruna:	And where did you hear the information about the weather?
Translator:	From brave project people by gmet .... From brave project by gmet people, Eagle FM which is radio station and URA radio, and community monitors who are recording raingauge data.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And when you had the weather information, what did you ... What did you use it for in your farming activities?
Translator:	I kept bonding and tie ridging in my farm ... In my farm. What I've used it for .... That's what I've used it for. I've made the bonding and tie ridging in my farm and I have .... I had a cowpea, bambara beans, groundnuts and rice.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. The crops that you mentioned, what specific activities did you use the information to change in the ... In your production of those crops?
Translator:	Yeah, I was cultivating maize in my farm land. Because of this project .... Brave project I've decided to change, cultivating maize and soyabeans for good yield. And now I've ... I'm having good yield for that land.
Shani Haruna:	So what did you hear about the maize and the crops that you grow, the soyabean, that made you to start using it?
Translator:	I've heard it from brave project by ... At brave project from gmet people, Eagle FM and in our group discussions. From brave project .... At brave project, from gmet people and Eagle FM and group discussions. They have a group in VSLA group, so she heard it from that places.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And in the future what would be the best way for her to receive weather information?
Translator:	We'll still hear it ... The information from ura FM, ura raadio.
Shani Haruna:	The radio set that she listen to the information from who owns it?
Translator:	The radioset is my own because bravr project gave me a radio set. So I'm the owner of the radio set.
Shani Haruna:	And who you uses the radio set most, is it she or her husband? Yeah, her husband.
Translator:	I myself ... I myself used to operate it regularly.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And do men have more phones than women here?
Translator:	Men have more phones than women because women ... Woman is poor. They don't have money to buy phones. That's why men have more phones than women.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And what kind of ... What information do agric extension officers give her about water management when they visit her?
Translator:	Mofa people gave us the information on weather that there will be heavy rainfall this year. And it's true. It has done. Rain have .... We had heavy rainfalls this year.
Shani Haruna:	What crops does she grow?
Translator:	I've cultivated soyabean, maize and Bambara beans.
Shani Haruna:	And how did she find out information about the crops?
Translator:	I've just used my own ... Use my own seeds, which I've been using this year.
Shani Haruna:	So you didn't ask for information about the crops from any source?
Translator:	I've asked for seeds last two years when I was ... I was to cultivate it ... I cultivated it in the this thing ... The yard. So because it was late, they've harvest and I lost on that this thing. So I asked the discussion on brave project day whether I can it or not. And the mofa .... The agric extension officer told me that if it hasn't done anything, I kept it well, I can use it. So I didn't ask of seeds again. I just used that seeds to sow this 2019.
Shani Haruna:	So you mentioned you found information about them from the agric officers. So which other people or groups did you find information from?
Translator:	I've been hearing my information from ura fm. Weather information from ura fm and GBC.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So the information you have been hearing on the radio, what changes did you make in your farming activities as a result of the information you heard on the radio?
Translator:	How I changed my view in farming activities is, I've ... I was a broadcasting my groundnuts, but since this project has educated on farming activities, I've decided to change and sowing with my hand. During sowing my groundnuts I've never broadcast it again.
Shani Haruna:	So apart from the broadcasting and sowing what other activities have you changed in your groundnuts as a result of the information you heard on the radio?
Translator:	Change by weeding my groundnuts early for the weeds not to affect the groundnuts.
Shani Haruna:	Then the soybeans, what changes did you make in your soybeans?
Translator:	Like what I said in the groundnuts sowing, I used to broadcast my soyabean too but now I'm using my hand to sow my soyabeans. And I monitor the soyabean, when it's ready for harvesting I look at the leaves if all the leaves are yellow, I will try and I will start harvesting my soyabean.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Then what about the livestock? What are the changes that you made in your livestock activities?
Translator:	I was rearing my ruminants just ... I would just have it calling it my goat or my sheep. But now I used to have their housing for them. I built the house ... The housing, and I made it claim for them to be staying there. And the food too, I used to give them food for ... And water for drinking in their place where they live. So they are now active and good for what I want to do.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Then how did you find the well monitoring training that you received?
Translator:	I didn't have .... I didn't have well monitoring training.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And do you think men and women have access to different information?
Translator:	Yes, they have. Men and women have different informations.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. What information do men have?
Translator:	I can't tell the different informations.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And do men get more information about water than women?
Translator:	Women have more inform... Water information than men because women search for water. That's why they have more information on water than men.
Shani Haruna:	And does that affect the relationship between men and women?
Translator:	No, it doesn't affect the relationship.
Shani Haruna:	What do you normally use water for? What activities do you use water for?
Translator:	We use water for bathing, drinking, cooking, washing basins, washing clothing and whatever. It's so many things that water ... We use water to do.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	So how has the brave project helped you to manage your water better?
Translator:	Water project have educated us .... Has built our capacity on harvesting .... Rainwater harvesting, which helps us to have our water ... To manage our water for our activities.
Shani Haruna:	Apart from the water harvesting that you mentioned, what other knowledge have you acquired from the brave project that has helped you to manage your water better?
Translator:	Since I've harvest it, I'll know how to manage it and it will ... I will benefit from the water.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. would you say that water usage results in disagreements?
Translator:	There is no disagreement. No, there is no disagreement.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. In your opinion, what needs to happen to improve water access and management here in Jawani?
Speaker 2:	We'll send .... For the future use we will send someone to assembly ... District assembly so that they will come.they will also get water sanitation people to come and see how they can do to repair our boreholes for us so that we'll have enough water in future.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And lastly, how has the brave helped you to increase your income and assets?
Translator:	I've ... They've helped a lot. Brave have helped me cultivate ... Know how I will cultivate my product and get more yield. Through that getting more yield I improve my income and the this thing .... For the small ruminants it has helped a lot because I was just rearing them for thieves. But now when since I've made their this thing for them ... Small ruminants houses for them, I have so many ruminants for my .... To improve my income. In case of having a problem I will just sell one and do what I want to do.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So we will like to thank you so much for your time and the experiences that you have shared with us.
Translator:	I've also thanked you for your time, for interviewing me today.


 
 
 
