Shani Haruna:	This interview is with 309 annon number 009. So sir, we would like you to state your full name, your date of birth and whether you are male or female.
309:	Yeah. My name is 309 and I my date of birth is 12th December, 1980. I'm a male.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	And do you hold any community positions?
309:	Yeah, I'm a community volunteer who works with ..., I'm only a leader. Just a community leader who supports in this thing .... Voluntary works.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Apart from that?
309:	I'm also a unit committee member.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Thanks so much. Okay. So, we would like to know ..., we'd like you to explain what your understanding of the brave project is.
309:	Yeah. My understanding about brave project is they come and then we try to ..., they teach us on our farming activities, on our rainwater harvesting and then we talk about it and then we educate people on radios ... URA radio, etcetera. And then they understand more about how to take care of our animals, how to feed ourselves and how to take ..., you know, how we can do to take care of our crops. So that it'll be fine and then it should not be just farming to eat but farming as a business.
Shani Haruna:	Then what did you learn about water under the brave project?
309:	I learned that we do harvest water during the raining season time and then we keep it and then during the dry season we use it. Either we use some for our crops, we use some to wash our clothings, we use some to give to our animals and feed them. So that's how I learned about water on the brave project.
Shani Haruna:	Then what did you learn about groundwater? That's the water that comes into your boreholes and then the wells for you to fetch for your activities.
309:	We learned that when we ... Boreholes helps us and they are very clean water because it's in the ground. They are very clean and then we use it. So we use some of them to drink and then it's healthy too, to our bodies.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So we're now coming to talk about access to weather information and how you use the weather information. So the first thing we would like to discuss is how did you find out information about the weather last season?
309:	The weather, it was about climate change. We learned something about climate change. And then what we learned last year was ... We understand that the rain pattern will come and then it will move gradually and it will ..., It is going to be successful, so it will help our crops to grow well. So actually what I experienced was that we didn't experience much drought. We didn't also experience heavy rains and everything, our crops were also okay.
Shani Haruna:	Where did you get information about the weather from?
309:	We get this information from brave Project and then we also have info ... People give us text messages about the weather and then we also listen to radio and then they'll tell us that today it will rain, today it may not rain and we get it from text messages too from a project I have forgotten to mention the name but I know it. We get it all the time.
Shani Haruna:	The text messages, Where do you receive it from?
309:	We receive the text messages from rain gauge. They give us text messages all the time. Yeah. We get the message from gmet. They always give us all the time, every ..., anytime at all it is about to rain or they give ... They'll even tell us that within this day, we may experience drought, we may experience rains. So it was from gmet.
Shani Haruna:	Apart from the messages that they send. Which other sources that ... Do they give you weather information... Do they use to give you weather information?
309:	Yeah, we get weather information from radios and televisions. They will tell us that ... We listen to radios and then they normally give news and let us understand that today we may experience rain, we may not experience rain. So we get it from televisions and radios, etcetera.
Shani Haruna:	The radio stations and then the TV stations that you mentioned are they local stations or they're at the national level?
309:	Yeah. they're national stations. I can give example. Like ura radio is under GBC and they give information. We also get some from GTV, we get some from TV3 and then JoyNews. So they're national stations.
309:	And you mentioned you use radio sets to listen to the weather information. Who owns the radio sets that you use?
309:	The radio set that I use, I own it.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So apart from the radio and then the TV and the brave project where you mentioned that you get the weather information are there other sources such as a farmer groups or social gatherings where you get information about that weather?
309:	Yeah, there are other sources. We get it from our colleagues farmer groups. We have farmer groups in Tariganga here who always when it is about to rain, if they get the information they will also pass it on to us. Yeah.
Shani Haruna:	How many of such groups do you have here?
309:	We have ..., actually we are up to ..., the groups are up to two ..., they're up to four or five. And then the group in which I belong to is also one of them and I also give informations too. So they're up to five groups.
Shani Haruna:	Then how did you find out about the .... How did you find information about the Weather this season? The season that just ended, how did you find out information about that weather?
309:	Yeah. Just as I earlier on said, this year, the season that just passed, we understood that it was ... We wouldn't experience much drought, we will not also experience heavy rains. And when ...., and actually that was what we experienced. What we experienced was that we didn't experience much ... Let's say so much ... Long days drought. But we didn't also get heavy rains to our crops, but it actually rained throughout.
Shani Haruna:	And where did you get that .... The information about the weather, which source did you get the weather information?
309:	Yeah, we get it from gmet. We get it from gmet.
Shani Haruna:	Apart from the gmet which other source did you get information?
309:	We get it from our farmer groups too, and radio stations too, we also get them from that place.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. That's nice. So you mentioned you you got information about the weather. Now, what changes did you do in your farming activities as a result of you getting access to the weather information?
309:	I get much improvement on my crops because once I got to understand that this was the time, the season will start and it must gradually go, it has made me to also plant my crops according to that time. And actually this year I got much yield because I followed even any rains that come small. If it is time for me to apply fertilizer or to weed or to do anything, I'll make sure I do it. So it actually helped my crops to grow and then I also got yield.
Shani Haruna:	So what crops do you grow?
309:	I grow maize. I grow soybeans. I grow sorghum, and then millet.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. we would like you to give specific examples on ... For the crops, how you used the weather information to make changes to specific activities for the various crops that you grow.
309:	Yeah, last two years what I got from maize was not all that much. I had about the fertilizers ... The sack ... The size five sack, I got 10 of them, but this year I got up to 15, which I knew it ..., That's the maize. And then last two years I didn't get anything from soybeans because the harvesting time was not done properly. And through this weather I get too, when I followed it well actually I also got soybeans up to size five two. It's the millet that I didn't get much because I didn't actually plant ..., you know, I didn't sow that one much. And the sorghum too I got it. I had the sorghum the small size up to seven of them. Yes. meanwhile last year I had five.
Shani Haruna:	So apart from the yields that uh you had improvement in the yields, what activities, like ... What specific activities in your farming did you change that made you to make or get more yields as compared to the last year?
309:	Yeah. this year what I did was ... It was through this brave training I understood ... I started making compost and then I use the compost to apply on my farm. And then I also planted early and then I weed early. And it is this compost that has helped my farm to get more yield like that because the compost, when I use it to apply on the farm, it helped, I didn't also spend much money on fertilizer as last two years. And yet ..., and I know it is because I also planted early that helped me because those who planted late, some of them didn't get it. They didn't get much yield.
Shani Haruna:	What did you hear about the weather that made you to sow early?
309:	Yeah. they told me that this year the season will start somewhere April-May going to June and actually, that was what happened and they said it may end early. So immediately the rains started ..., it actually started heavy ones, and when it started I didn't relax. I just started ploughing, preparing my land and then everything went on well for me.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
309:	This year too what happened is that especially the maize, I used the improved ones .... Those that can ... You know, maybe that can germinate fast, that uses a shorter period of months before it gives ... So I use that improve one from MoFA and then the soybeans too the same. There are others that when you use it and you don't harvest early, you will not get ..., everything will even remain on the farm. So this year what happened is that I changed the improved ones and then it helped me a lot. And because of the weather understood ..., that's why I earlier on said that the millet, I didn't get it much and I didn't also plant that one much because when I heard that it may end early, I decided not to plant much millet and that's why I didn't get that one much.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So in the future, what do you think is ... Would be the best way for you to receive weather information?
309:	Yeah, I'll be happy if .... At first the weather information that was coming, it was good. But, I need more improvement. If every week or every day I get information from the source that this is what will happen, it will help me actually prepare well and if this information can also be given earlier before the season starts so that we plan it well, it would be good because when it is that today it will rain and it rains today, maybe I have not prepared anything this year ... Just today to do anything. But if you should tell me two, three days coming, this will happen .... This is what is going to happen about the weather, that way it will help you plan towards those two days.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	Do you think more men ... Or men listen to radio more than women here?
309:	Over here dear, to me I would say ladies listen to radios more than men. That is what I know.
Shani Haruna:	Why is that so?
309:	Over here, What I study is that the ladies are always at home every evening and they get information to listen. But men sometimes will move away to their friends. Others will go and they are gathered at a place and they are conversing, they don't have time with radio, even TV. But ladies, they are always at home and then they listen to radio and then even watch TV than we do.
Shani Haruna:	And do men have more phones than women?
309:	If you take the ratio and you compare women and men, women are more than men and these days almost everybody uses phones. So to me, men are only using big, big phones. But the usage of phones, ladies use more phones than men.
Shani Haruna:	When you say big, big phones what ... Can you explain more on that for us?
309:	Yeah. phones that has internet and can access information from the net. They are the big phones I'm talking off. But ladies they are using the phones people call it the "yam". They may not get access, they can only get text messages. But when we are talking about WhatsApp phones, phones that can get access to internet, men use than women.
Shani Haruna:	So why is it that men use ... More men use the bigger phones than the women?
309:	If you compare the education level over here or the illiteracy level over here, more are more literacy done. Women. More men are more literates than women. So because they are literates ..., those ladies who are also literates they use the smarter phones as I explained, but most of them are not literates. Some of them are illiterates. That's why they're using the "yam" phones. They can easily make simple calls.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Then how often do agric extension officers provide you with information about farming activities?
309:	We have agric officers who always ..., who are ...., who goes round to the communities and even we also have one in our community here. He has been coming often. Actually, I cannot tell he has been coming frequently, but not every day, not every week. But at least every two weeks if we have any information he comes to tell us.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Then what kind of information do the agric extension officers give about water management and the weather?
309:	Agric officers always tell us to make sure that we keep our water clean and use it to take care of ourselves and then our family and then the animals. And they make us to understand that once the weather ..., when it is ..., there are some times it will be raining and that water is not good. How to harvest these water to keep, they always tell us to understand that water is more important and we need to use it.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And then we're now coming to talk about access to crop information and use. So, the crops that you cultivate, how did you find out information about them last season?
309:	The crop that I cultivate as I explained maize, sorghum, etcetera. This ... You see we always ..., for the Sorghum, we cultivate it and then we sell it to agric extension, especially PAS-Garu, that is Fara Naaya. So we always make sure that they tell us the prizes they think they will buy for the season. That will encourage us to actually, you know, cultivate it. So for the sorghum we get information from them that and they have been also giving us text messages about how to plant sorghum and how to make it nice so that it'll be marketable. So we get information from those ones. And then for the maize too, agric officers has been ..., they have been bringing some improved seeds and they will advise, advertise it and tell us to always try some. So when we try and see that they are good we pick those ones and leave the old ones that we've been using. So that is how I get information about the crops.
Shani Haruna:	So apart from the agric officers, which other source did you get information about that crops last season?
309:	We get much information from brave project and then we discuss it on radio. We get these informations from them, how we can make our crops nice and how we can get more yield and from our colleagues farmer groups. We also get information from the farmer groups because others will do it and will try to educate the other people too. So we get information from them too.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	So in the future, what do you think would be the best way for you to receive such information?
309:	In the future I would like to always get these informations from ... Now these days ... From my phone. If I get the information from my phone, I can read it and know what will happen. And then it's also good we educate farmers from information centers and then from radios. But if you get it from your phone very fast, you go because we are now in a global world.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Then what changes did you make in your farming activities because of you getting the information you heard on the radio?
309:	At first, I never knew that when you are planting, transplanting yield more than just sowing. But through the radio program, I get to know that if you transplant you get more yield. And then how to also prepare your land by applying compost. At first we didn't even have time with those ones, but through the training I got this to understand that if I actually prepare compost and apply it on my farm, I get more yield.
Shani Haruna:	Did you also make changes in your livestock rearing, and what are the changes that you made?
309:	Yeah, livestock I do some, I do a lot. At first, I never had time with my animals and I never treated them. But through the radio programs and then brave project and then agric extension officers' training, this time I get more improvement because if I see that my animal is not well, I don't just live it. I also treat it and I make sure I provide the necessary food so that I get more of them. So even this year there's much improvement on my goats. I think I have a lot of goats that are around and they don't go far because I feed them in the house, they come to drink water, everything is done in the house for them. So because of that they are not far. They are around my house.
Shani Haruna:	Okay, we're now coming to talk about the monitoring training and how you use that information. So we'll like to know, how did you find the well monitoring training today that you received?
309:	Actually this training, I was not part of it so I don't know much about it that I can explain. So I was not part of the training.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	So we are now about to talk about gender and access to information. Do you think men and women have access to different information here in Tariganga?
309:	Yeah. Access to information, this one, men, they don't get different information because the information we get we also pass it to our ..., the ladies. But sometimes ladies too get more information than us. So it's like for this one, ladies get information much than the men.
Shani Haruna:	Why do a women get more information than men?
309:	When you compare the formation of groups, women are into groups than men. Just some few men have added ... Involve themselves into various groups, but there are other men who are not involving themselves into those groups. And we get information from the various groups that we have. That's why I classified the women to always get ... Have access to information than men.
Shani Haruna:	Do you think men get ... Women get more information about water than men?
309:	Yes of course. Because women they use water most than us. So ..., but the few men who also get the information from water or water information actually also spread it. They are there. But when we even call for meetings like this, women will come more than men.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	And do you think the fact that women have more information about water affects the relationships between men and women?
309:	Actually, it has some ..., the affects .... Over here, you see when women get the information, they also pass it to their husbands and their children. So once they get the information, they'll surely pass it to men, but they will get it first. So it has some effect because definitely they will tell the men to ...
Shani Haruna:	Does it affect the relationship between husbands and wives, or men and women?
309:	Not, not much. It doesn't have any effect. It doesn't affect them much.
Shani Haruna:	We are now coming to talk about water use, management and disagreements. And so what do you normally use water for?
309:	We use water to drink. We use water to prepare our foods. We use water to wash our clothings. We use water to give to our animals. We use water on our crops.
Shani Haruna:	And how do you plan your water use?
309:	During the raining season, some of us have to always make sure that we provide a very big tank that we can store water there so that during the dry season we use it, especially those of us who are far from the dams, and we are also far from wells. And sorry from rivers. Some of us too have to prepare wells. We have to dig wells and then we also rely on boreholes to make sure that we get water for our domestic use.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	So how do you think that brave project has helped you to manage water better?
309:	Brave project has helped us a lot on how to manage water because rainwater harvesting, they were the people who taught us how to keep it. Because during the rainy season it'll rain heavily. All those water will be washed away. We will not keep it for future use. Meanwhile, when it is during the dry season we suffer. So because of that once they trained as to how to harvest water some of us are have now provided a lot of big tanks, not necessarily a polytank, but we provide a hole and we dress it nicely and we keep the water there so that when it is dry season time and then we do not get access to water like that we go in there fetch and use it, give it to our animals. And also some of them too we take it and we wash our clothes.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. You mentioned about boreholes and then wells. Do you have groups or associations or groups of people that are responsible for managing that boreholes, the wells and then the dams?
309:	Yeah, we have leaders who are responsible for managing these wells. We have them. We have a group of people.
Shani Haruna:	Who are those people? What do they do and how are they selected?
309:	They are community volunteers and then we have had a meeting and we select them, ask them to tax everybody to collect tokens, let's say monies so that if there's a fault in any of the boreholes or the wells, they would then use that money to maintain it and make it nice. So they goes round and take monies and also make sure that if you are mismanaging the water, you will be ... You pay more.
Shani Haruna:	In each of them groups, on the average how many people make up a group?
309:	As at now we have five people to a group to a borehole. So these five people, we have the chairman of the group, we have the organizer who calls for meeting, we also have somebody who takes the monies that's the treasurer and the secretary. And we also have ... We always take somebody as a rep for the women.
Shani Haruna:	How are the committee members selected?
309:	It is the community members who call ... When we always come for a meeting we try to select by election. We can ..., it can be an appointment, but we vote based on hands. We don't ... We always raise our hands and support that this person we want him or her to be our leader.
Shani Haruna:	And what do you consider before you choose a person to be on the committee?
309:	We consider a reliable person. Somebody who is also available all the time. We know that this person all the time when we want to get ... When we need him, we can get him. Because there are others who are traveling, who are from far places and they always come home, we don't select those people. We also select reliable people because especially keeping of monies, we make sure that we give it to somebody who we trust and will not spend our monies. And somebody who also have the time, who has the community at heart, that he can always make sure that he gathers people for meetings. So we always consider these things and we'll make sure we do our selections.
Speaker 1:	So would you say the use of the boreholes or wells and dam result in disagreements?
309:	Not at all. But sometimes if somebody refuses to pay, that is where you can see some disagreement between the leaders and that fellow because we've asked that everybody should pay some amount. So if you are not willing to pay that amount and then you want to use the water, that is where you have a problem with the leaders. So that is where we can get some disagreement. But even though we get some, but not much, just some few people who may not have understanding, they are the people who are having those problems.
Shani Haruna:	And in such cases, how are the disagreements resolved?
309:	What we do is that we always send them to the chiefs and the opinion leaders and then they give them advice. Those they think .... There are others too whom we know that they don't just have anything. We are not the same. Those people who do not have anything, we do consider them. But If we get to know that you have something but you refuse to pay, we will always send you to the chiefs and then they ask you questions and then they also sanction you possibly make you pay.
Shani Haruna:	And how do you think brave project has helped in improving some of the disagreements that you mentioned?
309:	Brave project has helped us because the trainings they've been giving to us they make us to understand that if there is any problem, let's try to resolve it at the appropriate place. We should not ... Make sure we quarrel and then we fight and abandon certain things. So once they always train us to make sure that we also involve the community leaders, the assembly members, and then the chiefs, we try to involve them. If you have anything we go there too.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	Then in your opinion, what do you think needs to happen to improve water access and management in your community?
309:	Actually, it will be good if we make sure we have access .... We make sure we have water all over it will help our work ... It will help us actually improve upon our living because there are other areas that we still need more water but we still train them because people will still harvest the raining season water but still if we don't have wells and then boreholes in some areas it will be very difficult to keep that water up to the dry season. So we still need more water in some areas.
Shani Haruna:	And how has brave helped you to improve your income?
309:	Through brave training I have actually improved my income a lot because they taught us how to take care of animals. Livestock and everything went on well. When I followed their practice, I actually got more improvement and then my crops too the same. So their training has helped me actually get more improved yield. And then even with the animals more growth.
Shani Haruna:	So we would like to thank you so much for your time and for your sharing your experiences with us. We're so happy and grateful to speak to you.
309:	Thank you also too because we are also happy and we are grateful. I'm also grateful to ... Actually coming and then being with brave project is a very good one. It has helped me improve my life, so I thank you too.
