Shani Haruna:	This is interview with 404, anon number 001.
Translator:	I'm Sahada Mahama. I'm the translator from 404 to Mr. Shani.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So we would like her to state her full name.
Translator:	Her name is 404.
Shani Haruna:	And what's her date of birth?
Translator:	She's sixty eighth years.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And does she hold any community positions?
Translator:	She's the section women's leader.
Shani Haruna:	And what does she do?
Translator:	She's a section women's leader who organize meetings for the women's and if anything is going to do like occasions like this, she's sharing their ... She gave the information to the women.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So now, we would like her to explain what her understanding of the brave project is.
Translator:	What I know about the brave project is on ploughing .... On farming activities like ploughing, weeding, sowing and fertilizer application.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And what did you learn about water under the brave project?
Translator:	I learned moisture conservation in the farm and harvesting of rainfall water for our home uses.
Shani Haruna:	And, what did you also learn about boreholes, wells and then your hand-dug wells?
Translator:	I learned about the hand-dug Wells and boreholes on .... Previous, we are thirsty, water .... We don't have enough water, but since we have knowledge on digging wells and hand-dug wells, we now have water for our activities.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So we're now coming to talk about access to weather information and its use. So the first thing we would like to know is, how did she find out information about the weather last season?
Translator:	I had the formation from brave project, MoFA office and radio stations.
Shani Haruna:	Which radio stations?
Translator:	The radio stations .... Ura radio, tizaa radio and Eagle FM.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And apart from the brave project, the radio stations, who else did she ask for information about the weather?
Translator:	I had the information from vsla groups, at vsla groups, from community monitors who are taking the rain gauge this thing .... Data.
Shani Haruna:	She mentioned she listens to radio to get the information. Who owns the wireless set that she listens to? Is it her husband or herself?
Translator:	I myself have a radio set because brave project gave me a radio set. So I'm Listening from my radio set.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And then men and women, who does she think listen to radio more than the other?
Translator:	Women are listening radio discussions than men.
Shani Haruna:	Why do women listen to radio discussions more than men?
Translator:	Women have time for the radio information, but men are busy. They don't have time to listen for radio discussions.
Shani Haruna:	And why do women have more time to listen to the radio discussions than men?
Translator:	Women work .... Women work in the house anytime at all. But men are not sitting in the house, they used to go out, they don't stay in the house regularly.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So she also mentioned agric officers. How does she get access to the agric officers for weather information?
Translator:	They used to come to our meetings .... Our group meetings. They come to meetings and spread the information for us to hear. That's why I heard from them.
Shani Haruna:	What kind of meetings do they come to?
Translator:	They come to the farmer and water meetings. That's where I used to hear the information.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So apart from the farmer and water group meetings are ther other groups in Jawani where she can have access to weather information?
Translator:	Yes, there is. There is a VSLA group that we meet and I hear the weather information from the facilitator there.
Shani Haruna:	So what we've been discussing is how she got access to weather information the previous season. Now how did she get information about the weather this season? The one that just ended .... The season that just ended.
Translator:	For the 2019 season, I heard the weather information from farmer and water group and VSLA groups.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So besides those .... The farmer and water group and then the VSLA group, did she hear the information from any other source?
Translator:	No, I didn't.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. then when she heard the weather information, what did she use that information to do?
Translator:	I used it to farm.
Shani Haruna:	How did you use that information in your farming activities?
Translator:	Use that .... I used that information to cultivate wandata maize .... Maize which is wandata, which is an improved variety.
Shani Haruna:	And what is it about that maize variety that made you to use that variety?
Translator:	I used it because our previous seeds are not .... Are longtime variety and maybe it will not be ready when the rain stop and you won't get good yield.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Translator:	PreviouslyI was weeding my this thing .... My farm whenever, I feel like going there. I will sow and go away. But since we have farmer and the water group, I learned that I should weed within two weeks time and interval .... Four weeks interval I should weed it so that it will be ... I will have good crops in my farm.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Sowhat other changes did you do in your livestock rearing because of you hearing information about the weather?
Translator:	I have a changes on ruminants rearing. I use .... Previously we used to tie them and raining season we used to tie them outside. They will be beaten by rain every time. But now through farmer and water group discussion, I realized that we have to have a husbandry for the ruminants and every time you clean their husbandry to be neat for their healthy.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	So besides the animal houses that she spoke about, what other changes did she make in her livestock rearing?
Translator:	I used to convey their manure to my ... And apply in my farm. Previously I was just rearing them and no treatment, but now I used to call veterinary officer to come and immunize them or give them drugs.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. In the future, what would be the best way for her to receive weather information?
Translator:	I will listen .... I will get the information from farmer and water group, vsla groups and whenever they are not there I will keep it in my mind and reminding myself on weather this thing .... Focus.
Shani Haruna:	The men and women here, who does she think has or have more phones than the other?
Translator:	Both men and women are having phones equal, even children to have phones.
Shani Haruna:	And why are they both having it equally?
Translator:	They use the phones for far informationsu. They use to get informations.
Shani Haruna:	And what does she mean by far information?
Translator:	Far informations like weddings, funeral and outdoorings.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	Do agric extension officers provide information about water management when the visit her?
Translator:	Yes, they do.
Shani Haruna:	And what information do they tell her about water management?
Translator:	They told us to harvest water and if we are harvesting water, we should harvest the first rain water which we mean dirty water to keep an parboil by our shea nuts and plastering of our houses.
Shani Haruna:	What about water management on your farm, what information do they provide you on that?
Translator:	I had .... They inform me on bonding and tiding in my farm. So that if I do that in my farm, my crops will be .... Will grow well when the moisture is conserved in the farm.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So the bonding and then the tie ridging, how does she do it on her farm?
Translator:	Instead of me ploughing along the sloping, she will cross the this thing ... Ploughing along the slope, so that it will across the slope so that it will the keep the water and for the moisture in the farm.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Andhow does she get access to the agric extension officers?
Translator:	I meet them in farmer and water group discussions. They comes to that group and talk to ... On that issues.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. and if the brave project is not there, how will she get access to the agric officers?
Translator:	We'll go to agric office and ask for the information whenever we need it.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. so what crops do you grow?
Translator:	I used to do Soyabean, cowpea, Bambara beans and okro.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. how does she get information about the crops that she mentioned?
Translator:	Previous years, I used to buy my seed at the market or at the market side or what I sowed for the last years. But now 2019 I ... Through farmer and water group discussion I bought my seeds from agric office and input ... From input dealers at Nalerigu. I used .... I went and bought chemicals for the pest of my okro and where I heard about it is, I was talking about the pest in my okro and somebody told me that there is a chemical in stores for sale for that. So I went and heard the information from radio that there is a chemicals for sale at the market for pests in our crops. So I went and bought the chemical from the input dealers.
Shani Haruna:	So who told you about the .... Who is that somebody that you mentioned?
Translator:	It is from radio information. I heard it from the radio station.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So in the future, what would be the best way for her to receive such information?
Translator:	She would like to hear the information from agric office.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	That informations that she has been hearing on the radio, what changes in her farming activities has she made as a result of hearing the information on the radio? We would like her to give some specific examples of the changes that she made in her farming activities.
Translator:	I've made a change and through that information. I used to farm wide, large land, but because I was not weeding it the actual weeding, but now I reduced my farm land by planting ... Sowing and I am able to weed it at appropriate time to have good yield.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	Apart from the weeding, what other activity did she change?
Translator:	I've made change .... I've made changes in my harvesting of soya bean. Previous time I was not monitoring my soya bean unless it starts scattering all over. But now I used to monitor it. Immediately I get ... I see the leaves red I will monitor it and come and harvest it early for not hacking in the field again. So that improves my yield and when I harvest it early.
Shani Haruna:	What about livestock? What changes has she made?
Translator:	I was not feeding my animals, but now since farmer and water group have discussed .... Have built our capacity on feeding animals, I used to feed my animals early in the morning before the goes out. Unlike the previous, I'll get to one month and I don't .... I didn't know where my animals are.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Then how did she find the well monitoring training that she received?
Translator:	No, I didn't receive any training on well monitoring.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And, does she think that men and women have access to different information?
Translator:	Men and women have different information all together.
Shani Haruna:	And why do they have different informations?
Translator:	They have different .... Men and women have different information because the world is not stable again. Men .... The children are not staying with their family regularly to know what is going on. So everybody have their own opinion and reason for their family and the community too. So they have different information all over.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And do men get more information about water more than women?
Translator:	Women have more information .... Water information than men because women have .... Woman are using water for home activities than men. That's why.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And does that affect the relationships between men and women?
Translator:	The ... It will not affect the this thing .... Their relationship because women will bring the information from the river to the house for the men to solve it. In case some will go and contaminate the this thing ... The water and women will have the information before the men because they goes for water, to fetch water. They'll have the information and come and inform the men to go and find out where from the contamination. So there will not be any effect or affect in that relationship.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	Nowwe're coming to talk about water use, management and disagreements. Sowhat do you use water for?
Translator:	Use water for plastering our houses, building our houses, flooring our houses, washing our clothings, washing our basins, bathing, cooking and drinking.
Shani Haruna:	And how are you able to manage your water so that you are able to use it for all the activities that you have mentioned?
Translator:	We have ponds, which we use to manage them for our buildings. And for the drinking water you just go and ... You wash your drinking pot and go for water from the well and put, cover it well for safety water and we can that for bathing, washing things in our this thing .... That's how we manage our water.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	And how has the brave project helped you to manage water better?
Translator:	They built our capacity on harvesting water, rainfall water. That's what they help.
Shani Haruna:	And,what other,education did they give you on water time management?
Translator:	Farmer and water project help to do bonding for in our farms to manage water for our moisture conservation.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. The water sources that you have been mentioning, the boreholes and the wells and the dams do you have committees that are responsible for managing those water sources?
Translator:	Yes, they have. We have borehole committees, well committees, but the dam doesn't have committee.
Shani Haruna:	So how are the members selected?
Translator:	They were selected by the community and at a community meeting and because .... The reason why they've selected her and Safia is that she is the responsible of the .... Because her role in the community. She's responsible for the organization of the women. She is ... She have the skills, leadership skills in the community for the community development.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	And, would she say that water usage results in disagreements?
Translator:	There is because there'll not have so many people in the river and there will not be disagreement. Someone will say I am the first person and the other one would say I'm the first person and it will just end where they are, it will not get up to the leaders to solve it.
Shani Haruna:	How has the brave helped her to resolve such disagreements?
Translator:	Farmer and water group have helped me on consultation issues. If that disagreement take place, I have to consult my members on how to solve it so that we will come together and solve it.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. Then in her opinion, what needs to happen to improve water access and management?
Translator:	We'll tell farmer and water project to help us drill water boreholes or wells. And I will tell community assemblyman and to be send to district assembly for help to drill and boreholes.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	So how has the .... How has the brave project helped to improve her income and assets?
Translator:	Farmer and water group project have helped me in farming activities to improve my income. Example like farming activities like how to plough, when to apply fertilizer, when to weed, when to apply fertilizer and how to manage .... To handle my ruminants to have healthy life.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. We will to thank you for your time and experience that you have shared with us this morning.
Translator:	I have also thnked you. God help you for having time to come to this community and record and interview me this morning.
