Shani Haruna:	This interview is with 412, anon number 012.
Translator:	I'm Sahadatu Mahama. I'm a translator from 412 to Mr. Shani.
Shani Haruna:	So we would like her to state her full name.
Translator:	Her name is 412.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. What is her date of birth?
Translator:	45, 45 years.
Shani Haruna:	Is she male or female?
Translator:	She's a female.
Shani Haruna:	And do you hold any community positions?
Translator:	She's a dickness in Pentecost Church. She's dickness pentecost church, TBA in health Voluntary and a chairperson for SET committee. The SET committee is community emergency transport committee.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So the .... So now we would like to know what her understanding of the brave project is.
Translator:	She understand it to be farmer and water group.
Shani Haruna:	And what did she learn under the brave?
Translator:	I've learnt a lot from brave project. First, I've learned the clearing of land for ploughing. I have learned harvesting of water and storage.
Shani Haruna:	And what else?
Translator:	I've also learned the rearing of livestock to improve their healthiness and their feedings.
Shani Haruna:	So what did you learn about the water?
Translator:	I've learned about the water storage on how to .... How it's use .... The usage that we use it to plaster our houses, wash .... For washing and bathing.
Shani Haruna:	What kind of water?
Translator:	The first rain water.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. And what did you also learn about groundwater?
Translator:	I have something ... I've learned something about the this thing .... The groundwater. I've learned that borehole water is cleaner than hand-dug wells because .... The reason why I've said that is the hand-dug wells we have containers which we use to fetch the water and we didn't .... There is no sanitation in that containers. That's why they will use it for fetching the water with dirty rope, so it will contaminate the water. That's why I say borehole water is good than the well waters and the well waters too ... You can .... If it hasn't have a lid, someone will come and put something inside it, it will contaminate it. So that's why I say it is not, it's not good like borehole water but they're all coming from the ground. The reason why I said the borehole water is clean than well water is that, if you are a good sanitation ... This thing .... Good woman, you bring your clean pan or container to fetch the water. And if you are not this thing ... Good hygiene ... You bring your dirty thing to fetch. So you send your dirty to your house and that person too will send her cleanness to the house. So it's not like the this thing ... The well water .... The well water, they will bring the dirty and put inside the water so that you all fetch it. You are clean and you come and fetch the dirty water. That's why he says they are two different water.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So, we'll now talk about access to weather information. How did you find out information about the weather last season?
Translator:	I just heard it from brave project.
Shani Haruna:	How did you hear it?
Translator:	From gmet people. I heard it from Gmet people and brave project meeting.
Shani Haruna:	So apart from brave and then gmet, which others sources did you get weather information from?
Translator:	From radio stations. Radio stations ... Nobel radio and tizaa radio and Eagle FM, and ura radio.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So for this season, how did you find out information about the weather?
Translator:	I had the information from brave project through gmet people and rainngauge data collectors and VSLA group discussions. I heard it from them.
Shani Haruna:	So, apart from these sources, if you were to ask for weather information, where would you or who would you ask for such information?
Translator:	First we were getting our information, like signs and symptoms and the this thing ... Like some will say the nest of a birds, if they are up, it means the trees which are in the stream, if the nests are up, there will be rain ... Above rain. And if the this thing .... The nests are down there'll be low rainfall. That's what we were observing when we asked the rain callers. But after this project we will get the information from the radio stations and the met people.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So the weather information that you had, what did you ... How did it help you in your farming activities?
Translator:	It helped me because my farm was having erosions. Since I've learned a lot in brave project, I made a farm bonding on my farm ... In my farm and I couldn't experience it this year.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So what other changes did you make in your farming activities?
Translator:	It has changed a lot because since I was ... I have been farming in the farm the erosion was in my farm. But when I've learned from brave project, I used to have a gutter for the erosion, so the water didn't pass through my this thing .... My land. And because of that, I had enough food in that land this year. I changed my maize variety seeds. So I've planted wandata ... The red wandata maize and it has done .... I have good yield.
Shani Haruna:	What made you to sow the new maize variety the wandata?
Translator:	I made my mind to change the variety .... The maze because I was planting the long time variety, but I made my mind to change the short variety and see whether the .... I've made the bonding ... Will it help or not. That's why I changed.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So the weather information, in the future, what would .... What would be the best way for you to receive the weather information?
Translator:	We'll get the information from radio stations.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	Men and women, who listen to radio more than the other?
Translator:	In my opinion, I think that men are listening to radio discussion than women because men have ... If they just come from their farm they will bath and lie down. But women are working in the evening and they used to listen to the radio at evening time. So women used to have work in the evening more than men. That's why men are listening from radio than women.
Shani Haruna:	So is there a better way that a women can get weather information apart from the radio sets?
Translator:	Women used to get the weather information from groups because they used to have group discussions in thier groups and they have community monitors who are facilitating the groups. So they had to give the information from where ... If they went for the meeting.
Shani Haruna:	Men ... Do men have more phones than women?
Speaker 2:	Women have phones than men especially the this thing ... The youth girls and boys, both of them have phones equal.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So why is .... Why do women have more phones than men?
Translator:	Women have ... Women have phones more than men because women ... The girls or the youth used to go for kayayo and they prefer giving money to their mothers than fathers. So, they will send money. Some are sending mobile money, but some are sending them through human this thing .... So they'll call and tell the mother the amount that she has given to somebody to bring to her so that she will know that they have sent her money, amount of this before the person will come home.
Shani Haruna:	So do the agric extension officers give you information about water management?
Translator:	Yes, they do?
Shani Haruna:	And what kind of information do they give you about water management?
Translator:	Yes, we have extension officers who are ... Who talks about water management to us. And they say we should harvest water and how to keep the water for household activities. And we have a problem on harvesting water because we don't have enough or big things to harvest the water. Like if we had a person who can build like a water tanks ... Sand water tanks for us, we would have preferred building that ones for water harvesting.
Shani Haruna:	So what crops do you grow?
Translator:	I sowed only maize.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So how did you find out information about your maize?
Translator:	I heard from a brave project meeting and it was conversation from a group member who did agric demonstration farm and had the seeds. So I heard from that place and I looked for the seeds and plant to see how it will be.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	What did you hear about the crop that made you to go and buy that maize and then sowed?
Translator:	Yes, the information that I had and I was eager to get the maize was that I heard it from brave project as I said. But I saw the plants itself, how it fruit and how it had this thing ... The yield. And that was 2018, so I insist getting it from that farmer to get the same yield. And for that matter, when I had it and I sowed it in 2019, I've never had maize like this year sowing .... This year maize. So that's why I was insisting to get that same seeds.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So, how did you know if your crops had a disease? How did you find out?
Translator:	You'll start repairing your seed by this time after harvesting. If you didn't prepare for the raining season and you get to that time and looking for the seeds, you won't get the good seads. So You have to prepare the seeds from this time to raining season so that you get good seeds. How you know that your this thing ... Your crops are having disease by monitoring them. If you monitor them after planting ... Sowing them, you monitor them for some stage so that you'll know that it is having a disease.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So when you find out that your crop has a disease. What next steps do you do?
Translator:	If you monitor and see that it has pests, you make mofa people to hear what .... You will draw their attention that you have your crops with pests so that they will show you the chemical that you will use, or they will give you. This year 2019 they were giving the chemical free for the pests. They will give you the chemical for the pest too.
Shani Haruna:	Soby what means do you draw their attention?
Translator:	We have village based agents in our community. So if I get that crops getting pests I will inform the VBA so that, she or he will send the information to agric and tell them to come and monitor it. But we have .... Now we have agric officer in for our community. So we'll just tell the VBA to tell the agric officer so that he or she will come and see them and give you the chemical for spraying it.
Shani Haruna:	So the radio information that you have been hearing, either on the project .... What changes did you make to your farming activities or livestock rearing?
Translator:	Changes have been done because I was just ... I will just .... I was not prepared for the season. But through brave project I decided to prepare for the season and for seed. So I prepared and bought improved seed for the season. So this year I have changes I've done in my farm by having improved seeds for sowing.
Shani Haruna:	Did you make any changes to the time that you start planting and what change is it?
Translator:	I have changes I have done because I've learned .... I've know the onset of .... I have now know onset of raining season and I used to have the date ... The month that I can plant and get good yield. So I have not been planting when .... Sowing when it just rain. I wait for the onset day before I plant.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So how did you find the well monitoring training that you received?
Translator:	No, I don't have any thing about the well monitoring because I didn't take part in the training.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	And do you think men and women have access to different information?
Translator:	Men and women have different info .... They had different information.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	So what kind of information do women get?
Translator:	Women and men have different this thing .... Women have their groups for discussing and they discuss about their household activities and men have their farm activities discussions. They will discuss in their group on their farm activities. And women will discuss in their group on their household activities. So they have different informations all together.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So do men get more information about water than women.
Translator:	Women have water information than men because men are not fetching water. Women are fetching water and they know the problems of water in the Riverside. Men just have to come and fetch water and do whatever they want to do. That's why women have water information than men.
Shani Haruna:	So does that affect the relationship between men and women?
Translator:	It has bad relationship between the women and the men because sometimes getting to dry sseason like this the stream water will stop and there'll be no water in the stream. It would've been the responsibility of the men to go and dig the hand-dug well but they won't do unless the women are coming to suffer before they will realize that ... Some few will realize that they should have do this for them? Not all of them. So that will spoil their relationship.
Shani Haruna:	Soin such a situation, what do they do?
Translator:	Men will go down ... At that point, few men will go down to the stream and dig the hand-dug wells for the woman to get water and come home.
Shani Haruna:	So we're now going to talk about water use, management and disagreements. So what do you use water for?
Translator:	We use water for drinking, bathing, washing, building, flooring and so on.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	And what has helped you to plan how you use the water for those activities better?
Translator:	I and my husband will plan how to get water or how to plan to build our ... To do our building this year. So we'll plan how to get money and get water or whatever we need to plan it to build.
Shani Haruna:	Okay.
Shani Haruna:	So how has the brave project helped you to manage water better?
Speaker 2:	Brave has helped me to harvest water by building my capacity on harvesting and storage. But I have no enough cans to store the water, but I know how to store water ... Harvest water and store for my .... And manage for my this thing .... My activities.
Shani Haruna:	So would you say the usage of the boreholes and then the wells, it results in the disagreements?
Translator:	Yes. It results disagreement because you will go there to fetch water by morning. You sit like 6.00am and you get to 6.30am, 6.20am. Someone will come to that time and wants to fetc before you. It will result disagreement there. The first person won't agree.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So how has brave helped you to improve such disagreements?
Translator:	If it is me, I will just exercise patience and tell my colleagues to exercise patience for her to fetch only her barrels and go and leave us to fetch our water.
Shani Haruna:	So how has the brave helped in improving or in enabling you to resolve such disagreements?
Translator:	The harvesting of the rainwater would have solve that problem because if you have enough rain water in your house, you won't go and stand for disagreement in the river. But we don't have large containers to store water or to harvest water. That is what ... And we don't know how to do and this disagreement won't come.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So in your opinion, what needs to happen so that you can have more access to water?
Translator:	We will contribute and get to assembly and see whether the can come and drill boreholes for us or wells for us so that we'll have enough water in the community.
Shani Haruna:	Okay. So finally how has the brave helped you to improve your income?
Translator:	We have .... Brave have helped us to know that if you have your good yield, you will have market on that yield than bad yield. So if you have a good yield, you get money and you can manage your income in the this thing .... And if you have your livestock rearing like feeding them, guiding them and they will be healthy .... Looking at their health place and they'll be healthy. You'll have enough money to do your activities smoothly. So you manage your income and be safe.
Shani Haruna:	So, we thank you so much for sharing your experience and for the time that you have shared with us.
Translator:	She has thank you for the time you use for interviewing her today.

